Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46
DOI 10.1007/s10479-007-0170-8
The dial-a-ride problem: models and algorithms
Jean-François Cordeau · Gilbert Laporte
Published online: 5 May 2007
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2007
Abstract The Dial-a-Ride Problem (DARP) consists of designing vehicle routes and schedules for n users who specify pickup and delivery requests between origins and destinations.
The aim is to plan a set of m minimum cost vehicle routes capable of accommodating as
many users as possible, under a set of constraints. The most common example arises in
door-to-door transportation for elderly or disabled people. The purpose of this article is to
review the scientific literature on the DARP. The main features of the problem are described
and a summary of the most important models and algorithms is provided.
Keywords Dial-a-ride problem · Survey · Static and dynamic pickup and delivery
problems
1 Introduction
The Dial-a-Ride Problem (DARP) consists of designing vehicle routes and schedules for
n users who specify pickup and delivery requests between origins and destinations. Very
often the same user will have two requests during the same day: an outbound request from
home to a destination (e.g., a hospital), and an inbound request for the return trip. In the
standard version, transport is supplied by a fleet of m identical vehicles based at the same
depot. The aim is to plan a set of minimum cost vehicle routes capable of accommodating as
many requests as possible, under a set of constraints. The most common example arises in
This is an updated version of a paper that appeared in 4OR 1:89–101, 2003.
J.-F. Cordeau ()
Canada Research Chair in Logistics and Transportation and GERAD, HEC Montréal, 3000,
chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal, Canada H3T 2A7
e-mail: cordeau@crt.umontreal.ca
G. Laporte
Canada Research Chair in Distribution Management and GERAD, HEC Montréal, 3000,
chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine, Montréal, Canada H3T 2A7
e-mail: gilbert@crt.umontreal.ca
30 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46
door-to-door transportation services for elderly or disabled people (see, e.g., Madsen et al.
1995; Toth and Vigo 1996, 1997; Borndörfer et al. 1997; Colorni and Righini 2001; Diana
and Dessouky 2004; Rekiek et al. 2006; Melachrinoudis et al. 2007).
In western countries several local authorities are setting up dial-a-ride services or are
overhauling existing systems in response to increasing demand. This phenomenon can be
attributed in part to the aging of the population but also to a trend toward the development
of ambulatory health care services. Some existing systems cannot adequately meet demand
while others are faced with escalating operating costs. There is a genuine need for reliable
cost effective systems, and operations research can help reach this goal.
From a modeling point of view, the DARP generalizes a number of vehicle routing problems such as the Pickup and Delivery Vehicle Routing Problem (PDVRP) and the Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows (VRPTW). For overviews on these problems, see
Cordeau et al. (2007a, 2007b). What makes the DARP different from most such routing
problems is the human perspective. When transporting passengers, reducing user inconvenience must be balanced against minimizing operating costs. In addition, vehicle capacity
is normally constraining in the DARP whereas it is often redundant in PDVRP applications,
particularly those related to the collection and delivery of letters and small parcels.
This paper updates and extends a previous survey published in 4OR (Cordeau and Laporte 2003b). It is organized as follows. The main features of the DARP are described in
Sect. 2, followed by mathematical models in Sect. 3. The following two sections summarize
the main algorithms for the single-vehicle DARP and for the multi-vehicle DARP, respectively. Conclusions follow in Sect. 6.
2 Main features of the DARP
Dial-a-ride services may operate according to a static or to a dynamic mode. In the first
case, all transportation requests are known beforehand, while in the second case requests
are gradually revealed throughout the day and vehicle routes are adjusted in real-time to
meet demand. In practice pure dynamic DARPs rarely exist since a subset of requests is
often known in advance.
Most studies on the DARP assume the availability of a fleet of m homogeneous vehicles
based at a single depot. While this hypothesis often reflects reality and can serve as a sound
base for the design of models and algorithms, it is important to realize that different situations exist in practice. There may be several depots, especially in wide geographical areas,
and the fleet is sometimes heterogeneous. Some vehicles are designed to carry wheelchairs
only, others may only cater to ambulatory passengers and some are capable of accommodating both types of passenger. The main consideration in some problems is to first determine a
fleet size and composition capable of satisfying all demand, while in other contexts, the aim
is to maximize the number of requests that can be served with a fixed size fleet. Some systems routinely turn down several requests each day. A compromise consists of serving some
of the demand with a core vehicle fleet and using extra vehicles (e.g., taxis) if necessary.
Given this, it makes sense to consider two possible problems: (1) minimize costs subject
to full demand satisfaction and side constraints; (2) maximize satisfied demand subject to
vehicle availability and side constraints. The most common cost elements relate to regular
fleet size and operation, occasional use of extra vehicles, and drivers’ wages.
Quality of service criteria include route duration, route length, customer waiting time,
customer ride time (i.e., total time spent in vehicles), and difference between actual and desired delivery times. Some of these criteria may be treated as constraints or as part of the
Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 31
objective function. A common trend in DARP models is to let users impose a time window
on both their departure and arrival times, but this may be unduly constraining for the transporter, particularly if these time windows are narrow. Following Jaw et al. (1986) we believe
that users should be able to specify a time window on the arrival time of their outbound trip
and on the departure time of their inbound trip. The transporter then determines a planned
departure time for the outbound trip and a planned arrival time for the inbound trip, while
satisfying an upper bound on the ride time. In practice, since travel times are somewhat
uncertain, the outbound departure time communicated to the user should be slightly earlier
than the scheduled time.
3 Mathematical models
Several models have been suggested for a number of variants of the DARP. These can be
found in the papers reviewed in Sects. 4 and 5. We present in Sect. 3.1 the three-index
formulation of Cordeau (2006) which is based on the modeling choices presented in Sect. 2.
This is followed in Sect. 3.2 by a more compact two-index formulation due to Ropke et
al. (2007). In addition, we will describe in Sect. 3.3 models for the so-called scheduling
problem, arising as a subproblem in some heuristics which first determine a routing sequence
and then attempt to reduce route durations.
3.1 A three-index formulation for the DARP
Cordeau (2006) formulates the DARP on a directed graph G = (V,A). The vertex set V
is partitioned into {{0, 2n + 1},P,D} where 0 and 2n + 1 are two copies of the depot,
P = {1,...,n} is the set of pickup vertices and D = {n + 1,..., 2n} is the set of delivery
vertices. A request is a couple (i,n + i), where i ∈ P and n + i ∈ D. To each vertex vi ∈ V
are associated a load qi, with q0 = q2n+1 = 0, qi ≥ 0 for i = 1,...,n and qi = −qi−n for
i = n + 1,..., 2n, and a service duration di ≥ 0 with d0 = d2n+1 = 0. The arc set is defined
as A = {(i,j): i = 0, j ∈ P , or i,j ∈ P ∪ D, i = j and i = n + j , or i ∈ D, j = 2n + 1}.
The capacity of vehicle k is Qk and the maximal duration of route k ∈ K is denoted by Tk .
The cost of traversing arc (i,j) with vehicle k is equal to ck
ij , and the travel time of arc (i,j)
is denoted by tij . The maximal ride time is denoted by L and the time window of vertex i is
[ei,i].
The model uses binary three-index variables xk
ij equal to 1 if and only if arc (i,j) is
traversed by vehicle k ∈ K. In addition, let uk
i be the time at which vehicle k starts servicing
vertex i, wk
i the load of vehicle k upon leaving vertex i, and r k
i the ride time of user i
(corresponding to request (i,n + i) on vehicle k). The model is then as follows.
(DARP)
Minimize
k∈K

i∈V

j∈V
ck
ij xk
ij (1)
subject to

k∈K

j∈V
xk
ij = 1 (i ∈ P), (2)

i∈V
xk
0i =
i∈V
xk
i,2n+1 = 1 (k ∈ K), (3)
32 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46

j∈V
xk
ij −
j∈V
xk
n+i,j = 0 (i ∈ P,k ∈ K), (4)

j∈V
xk
ji −
j∈V
xk
ij = 0 (i ∈ P ∪ D,k ∈ K), (5)
uk
j ≥ (uk
i + di + tij )xk
ij (i,j ∈ V,k ∈ K), (6)
wk
j ≥ (wk
i + qj )xk
ij (i,j ∈ V,k ∈ K), (7)
r k
i ≥ uk
n+i − (uk
i + di) (i ∈ P,k ∈ K), (8)
uk
2n+1 − uk
0 ≤ Tk (k ∈ K), (9)
ei ≤ uk
i ≤ i (i ∈ V,k ∈ K), (10)
ti,n+i ≤ r k
i ≤ L (i ∈ P,k ∈ K), (11)
max{0,qi} ≤ wk
i ≤ min{Qk,Qk + qi} (i ∈ V,k ∈ K), (12)
xk
ij = 0 or 1 (i,j ∈ V,k ∈ K). (13)
In this formulation, constraints (2) and (4) ensure that each request is served once by the
same vehicle, while constraints (3) and (5) guarantee that each vehicle starts and ends its
route at the depot. Constraints (6) to (8) define starts of service times, vehicle loads and user
ride times, respectively, while constraints (9) to (12) ensure that these will be feasible.
3.2 A two-index formulation for the DARP
More recently, Ropke et al. (2007) have proposed two models and a branch-and-cut algorithm for the PDP with time windows (PDPTW) and for the DARP, where all vehicles are
identical. The PDPTW is a DARP without the maximum ride time constraints. Here we
describe the better of the two models. It works with a homogeneous fleet of vehicles of
capacity Q and two-index variables xij . In this model, R denotes a path, R is the set of
infeasible paths with respect to time windows and maximum ride time constraints, A(R) is
the arc set of R, and U is the collection of all sets S ⊂ P ∪ D satisfying 3 ≤ |S|≤|V | − 2,
0 ∈ S, 2n + 1 ∈/ S and there exists i ∈ P\S with n + i ∈ S. Let also q(S) =
i∈S qi denote
the total load of vertices in S. The model is as follows.
(PDPTW-DARP)
Minimize
i∈V

j∈V
cij xij (14)
subject to

i∈V
xij = 1 (j ∈ P ∪ D), (15)

j∈V
xij = 1 (i ∈ P ∪ D), (16)

i,j∈S
xij ≤ |S| − 2 (S ∈ U), (17)

i,j∈S
xij ≤ |S| − max
1, |q(S)|/Q	
 (S ⊆ P ∪ D, |S| ≥ 2), (18)
Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 33

(i,j)∈A(R)
xij ≤ |A(R)| − 1 (R ∈ R), (19)
xij = 0 or 1 (i,j ∈ V ). (20)
In this model, constraints (17) guarantee that pairing and precedence constraints will
be satisfied, i.e., a pickup vertex i will appear on the same route and before its associated
delivery vertex n+i, constraints (18) are capacity constraints, and constraints (19) eliminate
infeasible paths.
3.3 The scheduling problem
Given a route k = (v0 = 0,...,vi,...,vq = 2n + 1) consisting of a sequence of q + 1 vertices of V , the scheduling problem is to determine the departure time from the depot and
the time at which service should begin at each vertex v1,...,vq−1, so that time windows are
satisfied and route duration is minimized. This problem is of critical importance whenever
an upper bound is imposed on route duration.
We use the following notation:
[ei,i]: a time window on the beginning of service at vertex vi (every vehicle
must leave the depot no earlier than e0 and return no later than 2n+1);
tij: the travel time from vi to vj ;
di: the service duration at vi;
Ai: the arrival time of the vehicle at vi;
ui: the time at which service begins at vi;
Di: the departure time from vi;
Wi: the waiting time at vi.
Note that ui ≥ max{ei,Ai} and Di = ui +di. The time window at vi is violated if ui > i.
Arrival at vi before ei is allowed and therefore the waiting time at that vertex is Wi = ui −Ai.
If the scheduling problem is feasible, a solution can be identified by sequentially setting
u0 = e0 and ui = max{ei,Ai} for i = 1,...,q. To reduce route duration and unnecessary
waiting time, it may be advantageous to delay departure from the depot and the beginning
of service at pickup vertices. For this, one must compute for each vi the maximum delay Fi
that can be incurred before service starts so that no time window in route k will be violated.
Savelsbergh (1992) calls Fi the forward time slack of vi. It is computed as follows:
Fi = min
i≤j≤q

j −

ui +
i≤p<j
(tp,p+1 + dp)
	, (21)
which can be rewritten as
Fi = min
i≤j≤q

i<p≤j
Wp + (j − uj )
	
, (22)
since uj = ui +
i≤p<j (tp,p+1 + dp) +
i<p≤j Wp.
The latter form emphasizes the fact that the slack at vertex vj is the cumulative waiting
time up to vertex vj , plus the difference between the end of the time window and the beginning of service at vj . The optimal departure time F0 from the depot can thus be determined
in O(q). Whenever the vehicle becomes empty, minimizing the ride time of the first user to
be picked up can be achieved by computing the forward time slack Fi of the corresponding
vertex vi.
34 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46
Instead of route duration, some authors have minimized an inconvenience function fk
computed in terms of the ui variables. Sexton and Bodin (1985a) consider the case where
fk = q−1
i=1 αiui and the αi’s are preset parameters. If vi+1 denotes the successor of vi in
route k, the problem can be formulated more generally as an optimization problem of the
form
Minimize q
i=0
gi(ui) (23)
subject to
ui − ui+1 ≤ −ti,i+1 − di (i = 0,...,q − 1), (24)
−ui ≤ −ei (i = 0,...,q), (25)
ui ≤ i (i = 0,...,q) (26)
where gi(ui) is a convex function defined with respect to the time window [ei,li]. Dumas et
al. (1989b) have proposed a dual approach to solve this problem by performing q unidimensional minimizations. In the special cases where the inconvenience functions are quadratic
or linear, the complexity of the algorithm is O(q).
Finally, we mention that Hunsaker and Savelsbergh (2002) have devised a procedure for
efficiently testing the feasibility of an insertion in construction or improvement heuristics.
They consider a variant of the DARP with time windows, an upper bound on Wi, and an
upper bound on the ride time, proportional to the driving time. They have shown how to
check in O(q) time whether the insertion of a given request in a route is feasible.
4 The single-vehicle DARP
One of the simplest cases of the DARP is that where all users are served by a single vehicle.
We will successively review algorithms for the static case, where all requests are known in
advance, and for the dynamic case, where they are gradually revealed in real-time.
4.1 The static case
Psaraftis (1980) formulated and solved the problem as a dynamic program in which the
objective function is the minimization of the weighted sum of route completion time and
customer dissatisfaction. Customer dissatisfaction is itself expressed as a weighted combination of waiting time before pickup and ride time. Time windows are not specified by users.
Instead the transporter imposes “maximum position shift” constraints limiting the difference
between the position of a user in the calling list and its position in the vehicle route. This
algorithm was later updated by the same author (Psaraftis 1983) to handle user-specified
time windows on departure and arrival times. As is often the case in dynamic programming
formulations, the algorithm can only solve relatively small instances optimally since the procedure has an O(n23n) complexity. The largest instance solved using this approach contains
nine users. While most DARPs arising in practice are much larger, the proposed approach
could still prove useful as a subroutine in a multi-vehicle algorithm, provided the number of
users in each route remains relatively small.
Sexton (1979) and Sexton and Bodin (1985a, 1985b) also view the single-vehicle DARP
as a step in a multi-vehicle DARP heuristic in which the users have previously been clustered. Their algorithm iterates between solving a routing problem by means of an insertion
Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 35
heuristic and solving the associated scheduling problem. They formally describe the alternation of these two steps in the context of Benders decomposition. These authors minimize a
user inconvenience function made up of the weighted sum of two terms. The first measures
the difference between the actual travel time and the direct travel time of a user. The second term is the (positive) difference between desired delivery time and actual delivery time,
under the assumption that the former is at least as large as the latter, late deliveries being
disallowed. As explained in Sect. 3.3, this objective can be expressed as a linear function of
the ui variables. Results are reported on several data sets from Baltimore and Gaithersburgh,
where the number of users varies between 7 and 20.
The single-vehicle DARP was reformulated as an integer program by Desrosiers et al.
(1986). The formulation includes time windows as well as vehicle capacity and precedence
constraints and it is solved exactly by dynamic programming. Using a double labelling
scheme, the authors were capable of identifying and later eliminating several dominated
states and state transitions. Optimal solutions were obtained for n = 40.
4.2 The dynamic case
The dynamic single-vehicle DARP was also considered by Psaraftis (1980). In this problem,
new requests occur dynamically in time but no information on future requests is available
(unlike what happens in stochastic programming). When a new request becomes known at
time t a planned solution is available. All requests scheduled before t have already been
processed and are no longer relevant. The problem is then to reoptimize the portion of the
solution from time t, including the new request. This is done by applying the dynamic programming algorithm developed for the static case. One practical difficulty stemming from
this approach is being capable of solving the problem at time t before the arrival of the next
request, which may not be feasible if the algorithm is slow and requests arrive in quick succession. One way around this difficulty, recently proposed by Gendreau et al. (2001) in the
context of dynamic ambulance relocation, is to precompute several scenarios, using parallel computing, in anticipation of future requests. Despite its limitations, Psaraftis’s work on
the dynamic single-vehicle DARP has helped define the concepts used in later research on
dynamic routing problems (see, e.g., Psaraftis 1988, 1995; Mitrovic-Mini ´ c et al. ´ 2004). The
algorithms for the single-vehicle case are summarized in Table 1.
5 The multi-vehicle DARP
Considerably more research has been carried out on the multi-vehicle DARP. Our survey is
again subdivided into the static case and the dynamic case.
5.1 The static case
One of the first heuristics for the multiple-vehicle static DARP was proposed by Jaw et al.
(1986). The model considered by these authors imposes windows on the pickup times of
inbound requests and on the delivery times of outbound requests. A maximum ride time,
expressed as a linear function of the direct ride time, is imposed for each user. In addition,
vehicles are not allowed to be idle when carrying passengers. A non-linear objective function
combining several types of disutility is used to assess the quality of solutions. The heuristic
selects users in order of earliest feasible pickup time and gradually inserts them into vehicle
routes so as to yield the least possible increase of the objective function. The algorithm was
36 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46
Table 1 Summary of several algorithms for the static single-vehicle DARP
Reference Objective Time windows Other
constraints
Algorithm Size of
instances
solved
Psaraftis
(1980)
Minimize a
combination of
route duration,
ride time and
waiting time
None Vehicle
capacity
Maximum
position shift
Exact.
Dynamic
programming
n ≤ 9
Psaraftis
(1983)
Minimize route
duration
On pickup and
delivery
Vehicle
capacity
Maximum
position shift
Exact.
Dynamic
programming
n ≤ 9
Sexton (1979),
Sexton and
Bodin (1985a,
1985b)
Minimize
weighted sum
of differences
between actual
and desired
delivery times,
and differences
between actual
and shortest
possible ride
times.
Upper bounds
on pickup and
delivery times
Vehicle
capacity
Heuristic.
Iterates
between
routing and
scheduling
phases
7 ≤ n ≤ 20
Desrosiers et
al. (1986)
Minimize route
duration
On pickup and
delivery
Vehicle
capacity
Exact.
Dynamic
programming
n ≤ 40
tested on artificial instances involving 250 users and on a real data set with 2617 users and
28 vehicles.
A commonly used technique in such problems consists of defining clusters of users to be
served by the same vehicle, prior to the routing phase. This idea is exploited by Bodin and
Sexton (1986) who construct clusters before applying to each cluster the single-vehicle algorithm of Sexton and Bodin (1985a, 1985b) and making swaps between the clusters. Results
are presented on two instances extracted from a Baltimore data base and containing approximately 85 users each. Dumas et al. (1989a) later improved upon this two-phase approach
by creating so-called “mini-clusters” of users, i.e., groups of users to be served within the
same area at approximately the same time. These mini-clusters are then optimally combined
to form feasible vehicle routes, using a column generation technique. Finally, each vehicle
route is reoptimized by means of the single-vehicle algorithm of Desrosiers et al. (1986),
and a scheduling step is executed. The authors have successfully solved instances derived
from real-life data from three Canadian cities: Montreal, Sherbrooke and Toronto. Instances
with up to 200 users are easily solved, while larger instances require the use of a spatial
and temporal decomposition technique. The mini-clustering phase was later improved by
Desrosiers et al. (1991) who presented results on a data set comprising almost 3000 users.
Finally, Ioachim et al. (1995) showed there was an advantage, in terms of solution quality,
to resorting to an optimization technique to construct the clusters.
A real-life problem arising in Bologna was tackled by Toth and Vigo (1996). Users specify requests with a time window on their origin and destination. A limit proportional to
direct distance is imposed on the ride time. Transportation is supplied by a fleet of capacitated minibuses and special cars. On occasions, taxis can be used but since these are not
Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 37
the best mode of transportation for disabled people, a penalty is imposed on their use. The
objective is to minimize the total cost of service. Toth and Vigo have developed a heuristic
consisting of first assigning requests to routes by means of a parallel insertion procedure,
and then performing intra-route and inter-route exchanges. Tests performed on instances involving between 276 and 312 requests show significant improvements with respect to the
previous hand-made solutions. Further improvements were later obtained (Toth and Vigo
1997) through the execution of a tabu thresholding post-optimization phase after the parallel insertion step.
Another study, by Borndörfer et al. (1997), also uses a two-phase approach in which
clusters of users are first constructed and then grouped together to form feasible vehicle
routes. A cluster is defined as a “maximal subtour such that the vehicle is never empty.” Its
two end-points correspond to the pickup of the first user and to the delivery of the last user,
respectively. In the first phase, a large set of good clusters is constructed and a set partitioning problem is then solved to select a subset of clusters serving each user exactly once. In
the second phase, feasible routes are enumerated by combining clusters and a second set
partitioning problem is solved to select the best set of routes covering each cluster exactly
once. Both set partitioning problems are solved by a branch-and-cut algorithm. On real-life
instances, the algorithm cannot always be run to completion so that it must stop prematurely with the best known solution. It was applied to instances including between 859 and
1771 transportation requests per day in Berlin.
The Cordeau and Laporte (2003a) heuristic for the multi-vehicle static DARP applies
tabu search to the following problem. Users specify a window on the arrival time of their
outbound trip and on the departure time of their inbound trip, and a maximum ride time is
associated with each request. It can either be the same for all requests, or computed by using
a maximum deviation factor from the most direct ride time of each particular trip. Capacity
and maximum route length constraints are imposed on the vehicles. The search algorithm
iteratively removes a transportation request and reinserts it into another route. As is now
commonly done in such contexts (Gendreau et al. 1994; Cordeau et al. 2001), intermediate
infeasible solutions are allowed through the use of a penalized objective function. Also,
the minimum duration schedule associated with each candidate solution is computed, as
explained in Sect. 3.3. The algorithm was tested on randomly generated instances (24 ≤
n ≤ 144) and on six data sets (n = 200 and 295) provided by a Danish transporter. With
respect to alternative algorithms such as column generation and branch-and-cut, tabu search
can easily accommodate a large variety of constraints and objectives, even if these are nonlinear.
The paper by Aldaihani and Dessouky (2003) considers a hybrid DARP in which two
types of service are offered: door-to-door transportation, and transportation to and from a
bus stop. The choice between the two modes is made within the algorithm. The authors have
developed a two-part heuristic consisting of an insertion-reinsertion descent phase, followed
by tabu search. Two objectives are considered: minimization of vehicle traveled distance and
minimization of passenger traveled time. Either objective is considered in different parts of
the algorithms. The authors report results using data from Lancaster County in California.
Diana and Dessouky (2004) have applied a parallel regret based insertion procedure to solve
a version of the DARP in which the objective is a weighted sum of distance, excess ride
time over direct travel time, and vehicle idle time. They have reported results on instances
of sizes 500 and 1000.
In 2006, four heuristics were published on the multi-vehicle DARP. In the paper by
Rekiek et al. (2006), the main objective is the minimization of the number of vehicles used.
38 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46
The authors propose a genetic algorithm for the clustering phase and an insertion mechanism for the routing phase. They report good results on data provided by the City of Brussels
(100 ≤ n ≤ 164). Xiang et al. (2006) solve an elaborate version of the DARP in which the
objective is the minimization of a combination of vehicle fixed costs, vehicle variable costs,
driver costs, waiting time, and service time under several operating constraints. Insertions
and inter-route exchanges are used to construct the routes. The authors introduce an element
of diversification in their search mechanism by using a secondary objective function focused
on idle times. Instances containing between 50 and 2000 requests were solved. The objective considered by Wong and Bell (2006) is the minimization of a linear combination of
total operating time, passenger ride time and taxi cost for unassigned requests. The authors
work with several vehicle types and maximum route durations. Some vehicles are equipped
for wheelchair access but the capacities reserved for wheelchair users and non-wheelchair
users are not substitutable. The authors propose a parallel insertion procedure. Users are first
ranked according to an index that measures the difficulty and inconvenience caused to other
requests when they are inserted into a route. The insertions are then made by considering
the most difficult requests first. This is followed by a post-optimization phase consisting of
trip reinsertions in other routes and trip exchanges. The algorithm was tested on artificial
instances involving 150 requests. Wolfler Calvo and Colorni (2006) have devised a heuristic
for a version of the DARP in which the number of available vehicles is fixed and windows
are imposed on pickup and delivery times. A hierarchical objective function is used: the
algorithm first attempts to service as many users as possible and then minimizes user inconvenience expressed as the sum of waiting time and excess ride time. The heuristic first
constructs a set of m routes and a number of subtours by solving an assignment problem.
A routing phase is then performed to insert the subtours in the m routes and to resequence
the vertices within the routes. Tests were carried out on instances involving between 10 and
180 users.
Two exact branch-and-cut algorithms were recently proposed for the version of the
DARP considered by Cordeau and Laporte (2003a). Cordeau (2006) and Ropke et al. (2007)
both formulate the problem as an integer linear program (with some continuous variables in
the first case). These two formulations are provided in Sects. 3.1 and 3.2, respectively. Several families of valid inequalities are also proposed for each model. Initially, the models are
solved by relaxing some of the constraints. During the branching process, separation algorithms are applied to identify violated constraints among those that were initially relaxed
or among the valid inequalities. These constraints are then introduced and the process ends
when the search tree has been explored according to the usual branch-and-bound rules. The
largest instance solved with the first algorithm contained 36 requests, while the largest one
solved by the second algorithm contained 96 requests.
More recently, Melachrinoudis et al. (2007) have proposed a heuristic for a version of the
DARP with soft time windows arising in a health-care organization. In this problem, the objective minimizes a linear combination of transportation costs and user inconvenience. Their
heuristic uses tabu search with request reinsertions. Instances containing up to 50 requests
were solved. Finally, Jørgensen et al. (2007) have worked with a multi-criteria objective
containing seven terms. Their heuristic alternates between a genetic search mechanism to
construct clusters and a modified nearest neighbour procedure to construct the routes. They
have solved instances containing between 24 and 144 requests.
Table 2 summarizes the algorithms proposed for the multi-vehicle static DARP.
Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 39 Table 2 Summary of several algorithms for the static multi-vehicle DARP Reference Objective Time windows Other constraints Algorithm Size of instances solved Jaw et al. (1986) Minimize non-linear combination of several types of disutility On pickup or delivery Vehicle capacity. Actual ride time cannot exceed a given percentage of minimum ride time Heuristic. Insertions n = 250 and n = 2617 Bodin and Sexton (1986) Minimize weighted sum of differences between actual and desired delivery times, and differences between actual and shortest possible ride times Upper bounds on pickup and delivery times Vehicle capacity Heuristic. Iterates between routing and scheduling phases
n ≈ 85
Dumas et al. (1989a),
Desrosiers et al. (1991),
Ioachim et al. (1995)
Minimize number of
vehicles used, then
minimize total route
duration
On pickup and delivery Several vehicle types.
Vehicle capacity.
Maximum route duration
Heuristic. Create
mini-clusters. Group them
by column generation.
Apply scheduling phase
n ≤ 1890 in
DDS (1989),
n = 2411 in
DDSTV (1991),
n = 2545 in
IDDS (1995)
Toth and Vigo (1996,
1997)
Minimize total service
cost
On pickup and delivery Vehicle capacity.
Maximum ride time
Heuristic. Parallel
insertions followed by
intra-route and inter-route
exchanges in TV (1996)
and also tabu thresholding
in TV (1997)
276
≤ n ≤ 312
Borndörfer et al. (1997) Minimize operational
costs (drivers and
vehicles)
On pickup and delivery Several vehicle types.
Vehicle capacity.
Maximum route duration
Heuristic. Set partitioning
formulation solved by
truncated branch-and-cut
algorithm
859
≤ n ≤ 1771
Cordeau and Laporte
(2003a)
Minimize total route
length
On pickup or delivery Vehicle capacity.
Maximum route duration.
Maximum ride time
Heuristic. Tabu search
with vertex reinsertions
24
≤ n ≤ 295
40 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 Table 2 (Continued) Reference Objective Time windows Other constraints Algorithm Size of instances solved Aldaihani and Dessouky
(2003)
Minimize total distance
traveled by vehicles.
Minimize total distance
traveled by users
On pickup and delivery Vehicle capacity Initial insertion and
reinsertion based
heuristic. Tabu search
42
≤ n ≤ 155
Diana and Dessouky
(2004)
Minimize a weighted
combination of distance,
excess ride time over
direct time, vehicle idle
time
Lower bound on pickup
time or upper bound on
delivery time
Vehicle capacity.
Maximum ride time.
Maximum waiting time at
pickup or drop-off
location
Heuristic. Regret based
insertion procedure
n = 500 and 1000
Rekiek et al. (2006) Minimize the number of
vehicles
On pickup and delivery Vehicle capacity Heuristic genetic
algorithm for clustering.
Insertions for routing
100
≤ n ≤ 164
Xiang et al. (2006) Minimize a linear
combination of vehicle
fixed and variable costs
and of driver variable
costs
On pickup and delivery Several vehicle types.
Vehicle capacity.
Maximum route durations.
Driver breaks and
maximum working times
Heuristics. Insertions,
inter-route exchanges.
Secondary objective to
provide diversification
50
≤ n ≤ 2000
Wong and Bell (2006) Minimize a linear
combination of total
operating time, passenger
ride time and taxi cost for
unassigned requests
On pickup and delivery Several vehicle types.
Vehicle capacity (some
vehicles can
accommodate
wheelchairs). Maximum
route duration. Maximum
ride time proportional to
direct travel time
Parallel insertions.
Reinsertions and
exchanges
n = 150
Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 41 Table 2 (Continued) Reference Objective Time windows Other constraints Algorithm Size of instances solved Wolfler Calvo and Colorni
(2006)
Minimize a linear
combination of number of
serviced users and level of
service of these users
On pickup and delivery Vehicle capacity Heuristic. Solve
assignment problems,
insert subtours in routes,
make routes feasible
10
≤ n ≤ 180
Cordeau (2006) Minimize total route
length
On pickup or delivery Vehicle capacity.
Maximum route duration.
Maximum ride time
Exact branch-and-cut
algorithm
16
≤ n ≤ 36
Ropke et al. (2007) Minimize total route
length
On pickup or delivery Vehicle capacity.
Maximum route duration.
Maximum ride time
Exact branch-and-cut
algorithm
16
≤ n ≤ 96
Melachrinoudis et al.
(2007)
Minimize a linear
combination of
transportation cost and
user inconvenience
On pickup and delivery.
Soft and hard limits
Several vehicle types.
Vehicle capacity
Heuristic. Tabu search
with vertex reinsertions
2 ≤ n ≤ 50
Jørgensen et al. (2007) Minimize a linear
combination of
transportation time, ride
time, excess of maximum
ride time, waiting time,
time windows violations,
work time and excess
work time
On pickup and delivery Vehicle capacity Heuristic. Alternation
between cluster
construction by genetic
search, and sequential
route construction through
nearest neighbour
procedure
24
≤ n ≤ 144
42 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 Table 3 Summary of several algorithms for the dynamic multi-vehicle DARP Reference Objective Time windows Other constraints Algorithm Size of instances solved Madsen et al. (1995) Multi-criteria objective On pickup or delivery Several vehicle types. Ve- hicle capacity. Maximum route duration. Maximum deviation between actual and shortest possible ride times Heuristic. Vertex insertions
n = 300
Teodorovic and
Radivojevic (2000)
Minimize a function
incorporating route
lengths, ride times and
time window violations
On pickup and delivery Vehicle capacity Sequential insertion of
users in vehicle routes.
Nine rules are used to give
more or less weight to the
various elements of the
objective
n = 900
Colorni and Righini
(2001)
Maximize the number of
serviced requests or
maximize the perceived
level of service, or
minimize the total
traveled distance
On pickup and delivery Vehicle capacity.
Maximum route duration
Alternation between
clustering and routing
algorithms.
Branch-and-bound
algorithm is applied to
sequence a subset of users
with time windows not
too far in the future
None
Coslovich et al. (2006) Minimize user
dissatisfaction
On pickup and delivery Deviation from desired
service time. Upper bound
on “excess ride time”
Insertions in current
routes. Route
reoptimizations with
modified 2-opt
25
≤ n ≤ 50
Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 43
5.2 The dynamic case
As noted by Borndörfer et al. (1997), the distinction between static and dynamic DARPs is
often blurred in practice since requests are often cancelled and, as a result, transporters may
allow the introduction of new requests in a solution designed for a static problem. Also, as
mentioned, dynamic DARPs rarely exist in a pure form since a number of requests are often
known when planning starts. The difficulty is then to design seed vehicle routes for these
requests with sufficient slack to accommodate future dynamic demand.
One interesting multi-vehicle dynamic DARP is described by Madsen et al. (1995) who
have solved a real-life problem involving services to elderly and disabled people in Copenhagen. Users may specify a desired pickup or delivery time window, but not both. Vehicles of
several types are used to provide service, not all of which are available at all times. Requests
arrive dynamically throughout the day, vehicle speeds are variable and vehicles may become
unavailable due to breakdowns. The authors have developed an insertion algorithm, called
REBUS, based on the procedure previously developed by Jaw et al. (1986). New requests are
dynamically inserted in vehicle routes taking into account their difficulty of insertion into
an existing route. The algorithm was tested on a 300-customer, 24-vehicle instance. The authors report that the algorithm was capable of generating good quality solutions within very
short computing times.
The problem solved by Teodorovic and Radivojevic (2000) does not work with a welldefined objective function, but with a set of three criteria to be minimized: the total traveled
distance, vehicle waiting times, and passenger ride times. Whenever a new request arrives,
it is inserted in one of the vehicle routes according to one of nine rules which depend on
whether the insertion of the request in a given route would yield a “small,” “medium” or
“big” increase of traveled distance or vehicle waiting time. Depending on the outcome, the
algorithm assigns a “very weak,” “weak,” “medium,” “strong” or “very strong” preference
to each vehicle. All numbers used in the evaluation are fuzzy and all preference measures
are calculated by means of fuzzy functions. Similar rules are used to determine the position
of the request in the selected route. The system was tested on artificial instances containing
900 requests.
Colorni and Righini (2001) have tested three different objectives, namely the maximization of serviced requests, the maximization of the perceived level of service by users, and the
minimization of traveled distance. Their system assumes that a negotiation with users takes
place in order to discourage them from imposing unduly tight time windows. The insertion
mechanism alternates between a clustering phase and a routing phase. The routing algorithm
applies branch-and-bound to a set of requests whose time windows are not too distant in the
future. The clustering phase works with exchanges. The authors report that they have performed experiments with their system (DARIA) in Crema and Verbania, located in northern
Italy, but they do not report any computational results.
A recent algorithm by Coslovich et al. (2006) follows a two-phase strategy for the insertion of a new request into an existing route. An off-line phase is first used to create a feasible
neighborhood of the current route through a 2-opt mechanism. An on-line phase is then used
to insert the new request with the objective of minimizing user dissatisfaction.
A summary of algorithms for the dynamic multi-vehicle DARP is presented in Table 3.
6 Conclusion
The DARP is an important and difficult routing problem encountered in several contexts
and likely to gain in importance in coming years. It shares several features with pickup and
44 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46
delivery problems arising in courier services, but since it is concerned with the transportation
of people, level of service criteria become more important. Thus punctuality, reduction of
idle time and route directness are more critical in the DARP. After more than twenty years
of research, it is fair to say that excellent heuristics exist for the static case. It is now possible
to solve instances with several hundreds of users within reasonable times and it should be
possible to apply decomposition techniques for larger instances involving, say, two or three
thousand users. We believe more emphasis should now be put on the dynamic version of
the problem. This involves the construction of an initial solution for a limited set of requests
known in advance and the design of features capable of determining whether a new request
should be served or not and if so, how existing routes should be modified to accommodate
it. In the same spirit, it should be possible to update a partially built solution to deal with
cancellations and other unforeseen events such as traffic delays and vehicle breakdowns.
In this spirit, recent studies on the determination of dynamic shortest paths (Pallottino and
Scutellà 1998) and of stochastic congestion (Fu 2002) bear particular significance. Finally,
advanced systems should make full use of new technologies such as vehicle positioning
systems now common in the area of emergency medical services (Brotcorne et al. 2003).
Acknowledgement This work was partly supported by a Strategic research grant provided by HEC Montréal, by the Quebec Government FCAR research program under grant 2002-GR-73080, and by the Canadian
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council under grants 227837-04 and 39682-05. This support is
gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are also due to a referee who provided valuable comments.
References
Aldaihani, M., & Dessouky, M. M. (2003). Hybrid scheduling methods for paratransit operations. Computers
& Industrial Engineering, 45, 75–96.
Bodin, L. D., & Sexton, T. (1986). The multi-vehicle subscriber dial-a-ride problem. TIMS Studies in Management Science, 2, 73–86.
Borndörfer, R., Klostermeier, F., Grötschel, M., & Küttner, C. (1997). Telebus Berlin: vehicle scheduling in
a dial-a-ride system, Technical report SC 97-23, Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum für Informationstechnik, Berlin.
Brotcorne, L., Laporte, G., & Semet, F. (2003). Ambulance location and relocation models. European Journal
of Operational Research, 147, 451–468.
Colorni, A., & Righini, G. (2001). Modeling and optimizing dynamic dial-a-ride problems. International
Transactions in Operational Research, 8, 155–166.
Cordeau, J.-F. (2006). A Branch-and-cut algorithm for the dial-a-ride problem. Operations Research, 54,
573–586.
Cordeau, J.-F., & Laporte, G. (2003a). A tabu search heuristic for the static multi-vehicle dial-a-ride problem.
Transportation Research B, 37, 579–594.
Cordeau, J.-F., & Laporte, G. (2003b). The dial-a-ride problem (DARP): variants, modeling issues and algorithms. 4OR: A Quarterly Journal of Operations Research, 1, 89–101.
Cordeau, J.-F., Laporte, G., & Mercier, A. (2001). A unified tabu search heuristic for vehicle routing problems
with time windows. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 52, 928–936.
Cordeau, J.-F., Laporte, G., Potvin, J.-Y., & Savelsbergh, M. W. P. (2007a). Transportation on demand. In
C. Barnhart & G. Laporte (Eds.), Transportation. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Cordeau, J.-F., Laporte, G., Savelsbergh, M. W. P., & Vigo, D. (2007b). Vehicle routing. In C. Barnhart &
G. Laporte (Eds.), Transportation. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Coslovich, L., Pesenti, R., & Ukovich, W. (2006). A two-phase insertion technique of unexpected customers
for a dynamic dial-a-ride problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 175, 1605–1615.
Desrosiers, J., Dumas, Y., & Soumis, F. (1986). A dynamic programming solution of the large-scale singlevehicle dial-a-ride problem with time windows. American Journal of Mathematical and Management
Sciences, 6, 301–325.
Desrosiers, J., Dumas, Y., Soumis, F., Taillefer, S., & Villeneuve, D. (1991). An algorithm for mini-clustering
in handicapped transport. Les Cahiers du GERAD, G-91-02, HEC Montréal.
Diana, M., & Dessouky, M. M. (2004). A new regret insertion heuristic for solving large-scale dial-a-ride
problems with time windows. Transportation Research Part B, 38, 539–557.
Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46 45
Dumas, Y., Desrosiers, J., & Soumis, F. (1989a). Large scale multi-vehicle dial-a-ride problems. Les Cahiers
du GERAD, G-89-30, HEC Montréal.
Dumas, Y., Soumis, F., & Desrosiers, J. (1989b). Optimizing the schedule for a fixed vehicle path with convex
inconvenience cost. Les Cahiers du GERAD, G-89-08, HEC Montréal.
Fu, L. (2002). Scheduling dial-a-ride paratransit under time-varying, stochastic congestion. Transportation
Research B, 36, 485–506.
Gendreau, M., Hertz, A., & Laporte, G. (1994). A tabu search heuristic for the vehicle routing problem.
Management Science, 40, 1276–1290.
Gendreau, M., Laporte, G., & Semet, F. (2001). A dynamic model and parallel tabu search algorithm for
real-time ambulance relocation. Parallel Computing, 27, 1641–1653.
Hunsaker, B., & Savelsbergh, M. W. P. (2002). Efficient feasibility testing for dial-a-ride problems. Operations Research Letters, 30, 169–173.
Ioachim, I., Desrosiers, J., Dumas, Y., & Solomon, M. M. (1995). A request clustering algorithm for door-todoor handicapped transportation. Transportation Science, 29, 63–78.
Jaw, J., Odoni, A. R., Psaraftis, H. N., & Wilson, N. H. M. (1986). A heuristic algorithm for the multi-vehicle
advance-request dial-a-ride problem with time windows. Transportation Research B, 20, 243–257.
Jørgensen, R. M., Larsen, J., & Bergvinsdottir, K. B. (2007, in press). Solving the dial-a-ride problem using
genetic algorithms. Journal of the Operational Research Society.
Madsen, O. B. G., Ravn, H. F., & Rygaard, J. M. (1995). A heuristic algorithm for the a dial-a-ride problem
with time windows, multiple capacities, and multiple objectives. Annals of Operations Research, 60,
193–208.
Melachrinoudis, E., Ilhan, A. B., & Min, H. (2007). A dial-a-ride problem for client transportation in a healthcare organization. Computers & Operations Research, 34, 742–759.
Mitrovic-Mini ´ c, S., Krishnamurti, R., & Laporte, G. (2004). Double-horizon based heuristics for the dynamic ´
pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Research B, 38, 669–685.
Pallottino, P., & Scutellà, M. G. (1998). Shortest path algorithms in transportation models: classical and innovative aspects. In P. Marcotte & S. Nguyen (Eds.), Equilibrium and advanced transportation modelling
(pp. 245–281). Boston: Kluwer.
Psaraftis, H. N. (1980). A dynamic programming approach to the single-vehicle, many-to-many immediate
request dial-a-ride problem. Transportation Science, 14, 130–154.
Psaraftis, H. N. (1983). An exact algorithm for the single-vehicle many-to-many dial-a-ride problem with
time windows. Transportation Science, 17, 351–357.
Psaraftis, H. N. (1988). Dynamic vehicle routing problems. In B. L. Golden & A. A. Assad (Eds.), Vehicle
routing: method and studies (pp. 223–248). Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Psaraftis, H. N. (1995). Dynamic vehicle routing: status and prospects. Annals of Operations Research, 61,
143–164.
Rekiek, B., Delchambre, A., & Saleh, H. A. (2006). Handicapped person transportation: an application of the
grouping genetic algorithm. Engineering Application of Artificial Intelligence, 19, 511–520.
Ropke, S., Cordeau, J.-F., & Laporte, G. (2007). Models and branch-and-cut algorithms for pickup and delivery problems with time windows. Networks, 49, 258–272.
Savelsbergh, M. W. P. (1992). The vehicle routing problem with time windows: minimizing route duration.
ORSA Journal on Computing, 4, 146–154.
Sexton, T. (1979). The single vehicle many-to-many routing and scheduling problem. Ph.D. dissertation,
SUNY at Stony Brook.
Sexton, T., & Bodin, L. D. (1985a). Optimizing single vehicle many-to-many operations with desired delivery
times: I. Scheduling. Transportation Science, 19, 378–410.
Sexton, T., & Bodin, L. D. (1985b). Optimizing single vehicle many-to-many operations with desired delivery
times: II. Routing. Transportation Science, 19, 411–435.
Teodorovic, D., & Radivojevic, G. (2000). A fuzzy logic approach to dynamic dial-a-ride problem. Fuzzy
Sets and Systems, 116, 23–33.
Toth, P., & Vigo, D. (1996). Fast local search algorithms for the handicapped persons transportation problem.
In I. H. Osman & J. P. Kelly (Eds.), Meta-heuristics: theory and applications (pp. 677–690). Boston:
Kluwer.
Toth, P., & Vigo, D. (1997). Heuristic algorithms for the handicapped persons transportation problem. Transportation Science, 31, 60–71.
46 Ann Oper Res (2007) 153: 29–46
Wolfler Calvo, R., & Colorni, A. (2007). An effective and fast heuristic for the dial-a-ride problem. 4OR: A
Quarterly Journal of Operations Research, 5, 61–73.
Wong, K. I., & Bell, M. G. H. (2006). Solution of the dial-a-ride problem with multi-dimensional capacity
constraints. International Transactions in Operational Research, 13, 195–208.
Xiang, Z., Chu, C., & Chen, H. (2006). A fast heuristic for solving a large-scale static dial-a-ride problem
under complex constraints. European Journal of Operational Research, 174, 1117–1139.