THE TRUCK DISPATCHING PROBLEM*
G. B. DANTZIG¹ AND J. H. RAMSER
The paper is concerned with the optimum routing of a fleet of gasoline delivery trucks between a bulk terminal and a large number of service stations
supplied by the terminal. The shortest routes between any two points in the
system are given and a demand for one or several products is specified for a
number of stations within the distribution system. It is desired to find a way
to assign stations to trucks in such a manner that station demands are satisfied
and total mileage covered by the fleet is a minimum. A procedure based on a
linear programming formulation is given for obtaining a near optimal solution.
The calculations may be readily performed by hand or by an automatic digital
computing machine. No practical applications of the method have been made
as yet. A number of trial problems have been calculated, however.
1. Introduction
The "Truck Dispatching Problem" formulated in this paper may be considered as a generalization of the "Traveling-Salesman Problem".(1) In itssimplest
form the Traveling-Salesman Problem is concerned with the determination of
the shortest route which passes through each of n given points once. Assuming
that each pair of points is joined by a link, the total number of different routes
through n points is žn!. Even for small values of n the total number of routes
is exceedingly large, e.g. for n = 15, there are 653,837,184,000 different routes.
One of the authors has collaborated with Fulkerson and Johnson in developing
a "cutting plane" approach for testing whether a proposed tour is optimal or
finding an improved solution if it is not.(2), (3)
The Traveling-Salesman Problem may be generalized by introducing additional conditions. Thus, the salesman may be required to return to the "terminal
point" whenever he has contacted m of the n - 1 remaining points, m being
a divisor of n - 1. For given n and m the problem is to find loops such that
all loops have a specified point in common and total loop length is a minimum.
Since the loops have one point in common, this problem may be called the
"Clover Leaf Problem". If m is small, optimal sets of m points may often be
determined by inspection of a map which contains the points and the arcs connecting them. One would look for "clusters of points" and determine by trial
and error the order in which they should be traversed, taking care that no loop
crosses itself. However, when clusters are not present in sufficient numbers or
when m is large, this procedure becomes inapplicable. In this case near-best
solutions may be obtained by the algorithm in this paper.
2. The Truck Dispatching Problem
The Traveling Salesman Problem may also be generalized by imposing the
condition that specified deliveries q; be made at every point P, (excepting the
terminal point). If the capacity of the carrier
* Received November 1958
1 The RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California
The Atlantic Refining Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
80
(1)
THE TRUCK DISPATCHING PROBLEM
σ Σα,
81
the problem is formally identical with the Traveling-Salesman Problem in its
original form since the carrier can serve every delivery point on one trip which
links all the points.
In the "Truck Dispatching Problem" the relation between C and the g, is
such that the carrier can only make between 1 and t deliveries on each trip.
Thus, the Truck Dispatching Problem is characterized by the relation
(2)
It is obvious that the number of carriers does not enter the problem when they
have the same capacity. Even when carriers of different capacities are involved,
or when a number of different products are to be delivered to every point, the
same mathematical model may be used as will be shown below. For simplicity
of presentation it will be assumed first that only one product is to be delivered
and that all trucks have the same capacity С.
The method of solution starts from the basic idea to synthesize the solution
in a number of "stages of aggregation" in which suboptimizations are carried
out on pairs of points or groups. The number of stages of aggregations to be
employed is determined as follows: order the deliveries, g., in a sequence q1,
q2,qi, qi+1,qn such that qiSq+1 for any i = 1, n - 1. Then
determine t such that
1+1
C and 2qi > C.
t obviously represents the maximum number of deliveries which a truck of capacity C can make for a given set of qi's. Since the sequence q1, 92,qt represents a feasible combination it may be in the optimal solution. Therefore, the
method of calculating the number of aggregations to be employed must admit
the combination q1, q2,q in the final aggregation. This will be the case if
the number of stages of aggregations, N, is determined such that
Nlog, t
since 2 is the largest number of points aggregated in the Nth and final stage
of aggregation.
For example if C = 6000 and the q, are the values shown in column Q of
Table 1, the ordered sequence of qi's is
1100, 1200, 1200, 1400, 1400, 1500, 1900
and t = 4. Therefore N = log2 4 = 2. In the first stage of aggregation only
those points are allowed to pair up whose combined demand does not exceed
C. In the second stage of aggregation any pair contained in the suboptimal
solution of stage 1 may then be combined with any other pair without exceeding
the truck capacity. If C = 7000 and the qi's are again the values listed in Table 1,
t = 5 and N = 3. In the first stage of aggregation only those points are allowed
to pair up whose combined demand does not exceed C. The pairings in the