Supervised Learning for Arrival Time Estimations in
Restaurant Meal Delivery
Florentin D. Hildebrandt Marlin W. Ulmer
August 2020
Abstract
Restaurant meal delivery companies have begun to provide customers with meal
arrival time estimations to inform the customers’ selection. Accurate estimations increase customer experience while inaccurate estimations may lead to dissatisfaction.
Estimating arrival times is challenging because of uncertainty in both delivery and meal
preparation process. To account for both processes, we present an offline as well as an
online-offline estimation approach. Our offline method uses supervised learning to map
state features directly to expected arrival times. Our online-offline method pairs online
simulations with an offline approximation of the underlying assignment and routing
policy; again achieved via supervised learning. Our computational study shows that
both methods perform comparably to a full near-optimal online simulation at a fraction
of the computational time. We also present an extensive analysis on how arrival time
estimation changes the experience for customers, restaurants, and the platform.
Keywords: Stochastic Dynamic Vehicle Routing, Machine Learning, Arrival Time
Predictions, Restaurant Meal Delivery
1 Introduction
Online food delivery is a billion-dollar industry. In 2019, the global annual revenue was US$
107,445m with an average annual growth-rate of 12.2%. The majority of revenue falls into
the segment of platform-to-consumer delivery (Statista Survey 2020). Platform-to-consumer
1
delivery services like UberEats, GrubHub and DoorDash mediate between customers and
restaurants. They allow customers to order from participating restaurants and subsequently
carry out the delivery themselves. Outsourcing logistics from restaurants to platform-toconsumer delivery services expands restaurants’ market without requiring an own fleet. In a
competitive market, each platform-to-consumer delivery service tries to get an edge over their
competitors by binding new customers to their platform. Improving customer satisfaction
is crucial to achieve this goal. The delivery process has a strong influence on customer
satisfaction. Complaints about late deliveries are abundant, but there are also ample reviews
that critique deliveries earlier than communicated. This is coherent with the literature where
customer satisfaction depends on both, service quality and service expectation (Reimann et
al. 2008). In the context of restaurant meal delivery, this means that not only fast delivery but
also accurate meal arrival time estimation are important. In fact, the deviance of expected
time of service is often a better predictor of customer satisfaction than actual time of service
is (Thompson et al. 1996; Davis and Heineke 1998).
Estimating arrival times is challenging due to uncertainty in preparation and delivery
process. The preparation time for an order and the time for parking and delivery may vary.
Further, future orders may be bundled with existing delivery tours, for example, when an
order is placed at the same restaurant only a short time later. A delay in preparation or
delivery process may not only delay the respective order but may lead to propagation to
other orders assigned to the driver. The bundling with a future order may further shift the
arrival time.
Suitable methods should anticipate the mentioned uncertainty in a fast manner to provide
customers with arrival time estimations in real time. Foreseeing delay requires to make the
most of available information raising the need for detailed arrival time estimation methods.
Unfortunately, accuracy often comes at the cost of runtime and the margin for a favorable
runtime-accuracy trade-off is thin: Customers typically expect arrival times for multiple
restaurants the very second they visit the website of a restaurant-meal-delivery platform. To
satisfy this constraint, prediction time per restaurant must not exceed a fraction of a second.
To overcome these challenges, we propose two methods: An offline method that is trained
prior to being employed and an online-offline that combines real-time simulation with offline
2
approximations. The methods address aforementioned uncertainties to derive accurate arrival time estimations while satisfying the given runtime constraints. Our offline method is
a supervised learning model. It predicts arrival times based on state features by means of
gradient boosted decision trees (GBDTs). The method relies only on historical data and does
not require a detailed simulator. In contrast, our online-offline method is inspired by full
online simulations of delivery process, meal preparation process, future demand, and routing. Full online simulations are highly accurate but infeasible due to the high computational
costs of simulating routing decisions. Our online-offline method exploits an offline supervised learning of the runtime-expensive routing and assignment policy to perform detailed
online simulations in real time. The offline routing approximation is achieved by learning
the routing and assignment policy supervised in a simulator with the help of a deep neural
network (DNN).
We compare our offline and our online-offline methods against two benchmark methods.
The first benchmark is myopic, but fast, and estimates arrival times by assuming static and
deterministic information. The second benchmark method performs full online simulations
with high runtimes. We show that our offline method and our online-offline method always
outperform the myopic benchmark method by a wide margin. The proposed methods come
close to the lower bound of full online simulations without noticeable runtimes.
We use our offline method for a detailed managerial analysis of the effect of communicating arrival times to customers. We derive the following insights:
1. Our trained solution method remains accurate when business grows and data changes.
2. Customer flexibility in wait time and restaurant selection has a major impact on the
overall number of orders per day.
3. Customers in the outskirts of the service area face long wait times and often reject to
order. Proximity of a restaurant to densely populated areas is a strong predictor of
the amount of orders the restaurant receives.
4. Advertising restaurants does not lead to workload congestion and is most effective for
restaurants with a below average amount of orders.
3
5. A decrease in reliability of preparation times for a restaurant is linked to a decrease
in orders and arrival time estimation quality for the restaurant as well as the overall
performance of the restaurant-meal-delivery platform.
The contributions of the paper address model and methodology. To the best of our
knowledge, our paper is among the first to estimate arrival times for a dynamic pickup
and delivery problem. We present a new and unified mathematical model, capturing the
interdependencies of arrival time estimation and the restaurant meal delivery problem. Our
offline and online-offline methods perform near-optimally despite their low runtime. Our
offline method is robust to changes in fleet, restaurants, and demand. Our online-offline
method is not limited to arrival time estimations and is therefore a general contribution
to the field of dynamic vehicle routing. The proposed approach to learn a routing policy
supervised enables swift online simulation of dynamic routing problems that were previously
limited by the computational burden of routing decisions. To the best of our knowledge, this
idea is novel in the vehicle routing literature.
The paper is outlined as follows: In Section 2, we present and discuss related literature.
In Section 3, we formally define the estimating arrival times for restaurant meal delivery
problem (EAT). In Section 4, we motivate and present our offline and online-offline method.
In Section 5, we provide details on our computational study and discuss the solution quality
of our proposed methods. In Section 6, we analyze the impact of communicating arrival times
to customers from the point of view of meal delivery platform, customer, and restaurant. In
Section 7, we conclude the paper with a summary of our results and an outlook on future
work.
2 Literature Review
In this section, we present related literature. Our problem combines three components:
restaurant meal delivery, arrival time estimation, and supervised machine learning. There
is only limited work in this domain. We first present the three most relevant works in
Subsection 2.1 and then give an overview of works on the individual components in Subsections 2.2-2.4.
4
2.1 Most Related Work
The work most closely related to ours is that of Liu et al. (2018), Ulmer and Thomas (2019),
and Zhu et al. (2020). Liu et al. (2018) consider meal delivery from a single restaurant from
where drivers pickup meals for a set of customers. They focus on the challenge that the
navigation and customer sequencing of drivers are unknown. Thus, the costs of assignment
decisions are uncertain as well. Liu et al. (2018) predict the drivers’ routes in a data-driven
approach and solve the order assignment problem. Our work assumes the driver routing to
be known up to uncertainty in service and preparation time as well as bundling operations
with future requests. The work by Liu et al. (2018) on travel time estimation complements
our work and can be integrated in our framework. Ulmer and Thomas (2019) consider
the home service problem where a service provider assigns time windows to customers and
subsequently serves them with a single vehicle. The problem comes with uncertainty in travel
and service times as well as uncertainty in bundling due to dynamic requests. Ulmer and
Thomas (2019) approximate arrival times by first aggregating the state space and second
assigning mean arrival times derived from offline simulations to the resulting partitions. The
work by Ulmer and Thomas (2019) considers a single vehicle, no pickups or dynamic routing,
and no synchronisation of parallel processes in routing and meal preparation. The method
of Ulmer and Thomas (2019) also employs temporal features only. We show in our analysis
that spatial features are crucial for accurate arrival time predictions for the RMDP. Zhu et
al. (2020) predict meal arrival times using a deep neural network trained on historical data
of a Chinese restaurant-meal-delivery platform. Zhu et al. (2020) are concerned with the
broader picture, integrating several aspects such as meteorological data, individual courier
performance, and time to prepare specific dishes. While their historical arrival times are
influenced by uncertainty in travel time, bundling, and synchronisation, they do not model
them explicitly. They also neglect any routing information and forecasts of future demands.
As we will later show, both are very valuable for accurate arrival time estimations.
5
2.2 Restaurant Meal Delivery
The restaurant meal delivery problem (RMDP) was recently introduced by Ulmer et al. (2020)
and by Reyes et al. (2018). In the RMDP, a fleet of delivery vehicles serves dynamic customer
requests that occur over the course of the day. Customers choose from a list of restaurants
and place their order. The restaurant meal delivery service assigns each order to a driver,
who picks up the meal at the restaurant and delivers it to the customer. The RMDP belongs
to the class of dynamic pickup and delivery problems (dPDP), see, for example, Berbeglia
et al. (2010). The additional challenge of the RMDP is characterized by the unique stochasticity in delivery- and meal preparation process as well as the urgency of dynamic requests.
The limited work on RMDP analyses how to minimize delivery times (Reyes et al. 2018;
Yildiz and Savelsbergh 2019), avoid delay (Ulmer et al. 2020), or how to schedule drivers in
case the workforce is uncertain (Dai and Liu 2019; Ulmer and Savelsbergh 2020). None of
the works are concerned with estimations of arrival times and their consequences.
2.3 Arrival Time Estimation
Arrival time estimation for transportation and logistics has been studied in the literature.
There is work on traffic information systems that estimate travel times for given road segments; public transit systems in which arrival times are predicted for fixed routes; lead
time prediction for industrial processes; and stochastic vehicle routing with time windows
(SVRPTW) where time estimations are required to construct time windows and routes in
accordance to each other.
Tab. 1 presents an overview of work that address arrival time estimations in logistics and
transportation. The first part of the table presents the most related work that we discussed
in Section 2. The second part gives a general overview on arrival time estimations. We classify the literature with regards to their considered uncertainty and their solution approach.
The first column states the author, year, and field of application of the paper. The column
“Routing” indicates whether time estimations are based on vehicle routes. For instance,
lead time prediction (Polato et al. 2014; Lingitz et al. 2018) focuses on a manufacturing
environment that does not necessarily include routes. We put the checkmark in parenthe6
Table 1 Classification of Literature on Arrival Time Estimations
Uncertainty Solution Approach
Literature & Application Routing
Travel/Service
Times
Bundling
Processing
Times
Offline Online
Liu et al. (2018)
(Restaurant Meal Delivery)
X X (X) X
Ulmer and Thomas (2019)
(Home Service)
X X X X
Zhu et al. (2020)
(Meal Arrival Time Prediction)
(X) (X) (X) (X) X
Chen et al. (2004)
(Public Transit System)
X X X X
Chu et al. (2005)
(Travel Time Prediction)
(X) X X
Van Lint et al. (2005)
(Traffic Information System)
(X) X X
Lee (2009)
(Travel Time Prediction)
(X) X X
Lee et al. (2009)
(Travel Time Prediction)
X X X X
Li et al. (2010)
(SVRPTW)
X X X
Zhang et al. (2013)
(SVRPTW)
X X X
Polato et al. (2014)
(Lead Time Prediction)
X X X
Kim (2017)
(Travel Time Prediction)
X X X X
Lingitz et al. (2018)
(Lead Time Prediction)
X X
Poschmann et al. (2019)
(Maritime Transport Chain)
(X) X X X
Wu and Wu (2019)
(Package Delivery System)
X X X
Vareias et al. (2019)
(SVRPTW)
X X X
Prokhorchuk et al. (2019)
(Traffic Information System)
(X) X X
Bertsimas et al. (2019)
(Traffic Information System)
(X) X X
Huang et al. (2020)
(Travel Time Prediction)
(X) X X
Florio et al. (2020)
(Travel Time Prediction)
(X) X X X
Hoogeboom et al. (2020)
(SVRPTW)
X X X
Our work
(Restaurant Meal Delivery)
X X X X X X
ses if routes consist of a trip between a single origin and destination; i.e. when predicting
freeway travel times for single road segments (Lee 2009). The column “Uncertainty” indi7
cates whether uncertainty in travel/service times, uncertainty in bundling with future orders
or jobs, or uncertainty in processing times are considered. Uncertainty in travel/service
times is prominent in urban areas where traffic congestion is frequent and parking spots are
scarce or when service times are volatile; uncertainty in bundling occurs when customers
request dynamically and vehicles are allowed to bundle requests in the route such that existing requests are shifted to a later time; uncertainty in processing times is caused by the
synchronisation of two stochastic processes, i.e. the synchronisation of delivery process and
meal preparation process. Uncertainty in processing times also occurs in intermodal logistic
networks, where processes of different stakeholders have to be synchronized along the transport chain (Poschmann et al. 2019). The column “Solution Approach” indicates whether
the authors employed an offline or an online method. Offline methods conduct the majority
of calculations prior to their deployment. In contrast, online methods conduct calculations
on-the-fly.
Following our classification in Tab. 1, we analyze the literature with regards to the underlying model and the solution method. From the point of view of the underlying model,
we are interested in time estimation for routing problems. We first consider the arrival
time estimation for SVRPTW. As the RMDP, the SVPRTW combines temporal estimations
with routing but lacks the dynamicity of the RMDP. The majority of work on SVRPTW
focuses on stochastic service and travel times but does not consider dynamic requests. Li
et al. (2010) consider a stochastic vehicle routing problem with given time windows. When
designing routes, time windows have to be satisfied with a fixed probability. Li et al. (2010)
check whether a route is feasible by directly approximating the unknown expected arrival
times by means of online simulations. In their work, they use exact information on the distribution of travel and service times. However, Li et al. (2010) indicate that online simulation
is computationally too demanding for practical application. Zhang et al. (2013) minimize
the carrier’s total costs while guaranteeing a minimum on-time arrival probability. They
estimate arrival times by a sum of expected service and travel times to calculate the on-time
arrival probability. Vareias et al. (2019) design minimum-cost routes and then assign time
windows that minimize the associated expected penalty costs. Vareias et al. (2019) only consider stochastic travel times and shape arrival times as the Cartesian product of disruption
8
scenarios for arcs traveled to reach the customer. Hoogeboom et al. (2020) simultaneously
construct routes and time windows that minimize the expected travel time and the risk that
time windows are violated. They estimate arrival times based on mean travel times for each
arc. The solution methods of Zhang et al. (2013), Vareias et al. (2019), and Hoogeboom
et al. (2020) are not designed to handle uncertainty in bundling or synchronisation as present
in our problem setting.
None of the works reflect the unique time estimation challenge posed by restaurant meal
delivery. In the RMDP, we face stochastic parking and delivery times, we face uncertainty
in bundling orders from the same or adjacent restaurants, and we face wait times due to the
synchronisation of delivery process with meal preparation process.
Next, we analyze the literature with regards to the solution method. We propose an
offline and an online-offline method to estimate arrival times for the RMDP. In our offline
approach, we map aggregated states to expected arrival times by means of gradient boosted
decision trees. Offline approaches are frequently used in time estimation for transportation
and logistics. We first discuss offline methods to predict travel times. Chen et al. (2004) use
a neural network to predict bus travel times by aggregating states to their day of week, time
of day, weather, and road segment. Chen et al. (2004) extent their offline approach with
an online component. They refine estimations by processing real-time vehicle locations with
the help of a Kalman filter. Lee (2009) predicts freeway travel times. The author aggregates
the state space by k-means clustering and predicts travel times on the resulting clusters
with the help of a neural network. Bertsimas et al. (2019) assign travel times to arcs in a
network based on noisy origin-destination data. They add a regularization term to their cost
function in order to generalize from missing data and introduce an iterative path generation
scheme to reduce the underlying large-scale mixed-integer problem to a problem solvable in
reasonable time. Huang et al. (2020) employ tree-based ensembles to predict the duration
of taxi trips in New York based on a set of handcrafted features. They only consider trips
between two locations and not entire routes.
Few works in time estimation for transportation and logistics employ online methods.
Chu et al. (2005) predict freeway travel times based on real-time location data with the help
of a Kalman filter. For our problem, the vehicle positions are known but if this was not the
9
case we could integrate a Kalman filter into our method in a similar fashion. Prokhorchuk
et al. (2019) estimate travel time distributions for each arc of a road network by means
of Bayesian inference trained on floating car data. Florio et al. (2020) propose a gradientbased method to assign travel times to road segments. The methods of Prokhorchuk et
al. (2019) and Florio et al. (2020) can either be trained offline and then applied on new
data or perform online updates of travel time on road segments based on current travel time
observations. Online methods excel on simple problem structures where no difficult decisions
have to be made during simulations. This is not the case in vehicle routing problems (VRPs)
where simulating routing and assignment decisions is costly. In our online-offline method,
we approximate a given routing policy with the help of a neural network. The approximate
routing policy is then used to accelerate routing decisions in online simulations; enabling us
to estimate arrival times by a sampling mean in real time. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no comparable approach in the literature on time estimation for transportation and
logistics. However, there are related ideas on learning routing and assignment decisions in
the field of machine learning for static VRPs. We provide more details in the next subsection.
The RMDP poses a new challenge in time estimation. Due to its unique combination
of uncertainties, none of the existing solution approaches are tailored to the RMDP. We fill
the gap with an offline method that captures the unique features of the RMDP and with an
online-offline method that enables detailed simulations of the RMDP in real time.
2.4 Machine Learning in Vehicle Routing
In this subsection, we embed our online-offline solution method in the literature. We learn
a routing policy supervised with a neural network to accelerate simulations. Our neural
network takes an existing route and a delivery request as input and predicts how a given
routing policy would integrate the request into the route. The network is trained on a set of
observed routing decisions made by the routing policy. We employ the network as a faster
substitute of a given routing policy.
There are several related ideas in the traveling salesperson problem (TSP) literature,
where an optimal but slow solution method is replaced by a faster neural network. Bello
et al. (2016), Deudon et al. (2018), and Miki et al. (2018) encode TSP instances in a format
10
suitable for a neural network architecture to derive tours that solve the instances. The
work of Miki et al. (2018) shares similarities with our idea. Miki et al. (2018) encode TSP
instances as images to leverage the potential of convolutional neural networks (CNN). Using
supervised learning, they interpolate between known optimal solutions of TSP instances.
Though, for large scale instances, where no optimal solutions are known, they fall back on
training their CNN using reinforcement learning.
In contrast to our supervised learning approach, Bello et al. (2016) and Deudon et
al. (2018) focus on reinforcement learning. Bello et al. (2016) derive heuristic solutions
to the TSP by mapping a set of city coordinates to a city permutation by means of reinforcement learning. They employ a recurrent network to encode city coordinates and a pointer
network to point to iteratively built routes. This allows them to generalize their approach
to solve TSPs of variable size. Deudon et al. (2018) use the same approach but choose a
feed-forward neural network, instead.
In dynamic routing (like our problem), there is only work on reinforcement learning. A
frequent solution approach is value function approximation (VFA). An approximate value
function estimates the long term benefit of being in a state and therefore allows for far-sighted
decision making in complex environments. Value functions are commonly approximated by
means of reinforcement learning. The reader is referred to Ulmer (2020) for an overview
of VFA in dynamic vehicle routing. However, approximating a value function by means
of reinforcement learning is not suitable to estimate arrival times. Work on using neural
networks (NN) in supervised learning for VRPs is particularly scarce. Ma´ndziuk (2018)
provides an overview of recent advances in the VRP literature over the last few years, where
the author points out that “it came as a surprise to the author that NNs have practically
not been utilized in the VRP domain . . . ”.
Work on online-offline methods is even more rare. An exception is the work by Ulmer et
al. (2019) where they use an offline VFA in an online simulation to decide about acceptance
or rejections of customers. The routing is conducted in full detail leading to calculation
times of several minutes per customer request. To the best of our knowledge, we believe to
be the first to approximate routing decisions offline in order to perform online simulations
of a dynamic vehicle routing problem in real time.
11
3 Problem Definition
In this section, we define the problem of estimating arrival times for delivery routing (EAT).
The problem is part of the restaurant meal delivery problem with arrival time estimation (RMDPEAT), an extension of the RMDP presented in Ulmer et al. (2020). In the
RMDPEAT, customers order restaurant delivery over the course of the day. The orders are
picked up and delivered by the platform’s delivery fleet. Each customer’s choice is informed
by estimated arrival times for each restaurant. The goals of the RMDPEAT are twofold:
serve many customers and provide accurate arrival time estimations. The latter is the goal of
the EAT and the focus of this work. In the following, we first describe the dynamic decision
process of the RMDPEAT and highlight the role of EAT. We then provide an example for a
decision state of the RMDPEAT to prepare the subsequent definition of EAT.
3.1 Restaurant Meal Delivery Problem with Arrival Time Estimation
In the classical RMDP, customers spontaneously order meals from a list of restaurants
through a restaurant-meal-delivery platform. Each meal is picked up by a driver at the
restaurant and delivered to the respective customer. Drivers are permitted to bundle meals
during their route before delivering them. We extend the classical RMDP by assuming that
restaurant meal delivery services offer customers an estimated time of arrival for each restaurant. Given that information, customers choose from restaurants based on their preferences
(in restaurants and delivery times). Thus, the customer may decide not to order at all. We
illustrate the entire RMDPEAT process as a business processing modeling notation (BPMN)
model in Fig. 1. We depict the different actors in the RMDPEAT as swimlanes. The interactions between actors are modeled as a flowchart. The process is started when a customer
requests delivery (mail symbol); e.g. by visiting the website of the restaurant-meal-delivery
platform. The customer is asked to enter their address data and the dispatcher checks information about the status of fleet and restaurants. Based on the information, the dispatcher
estimates the arrival time at the customer for each potential restaurant and communicates
the estimated arrival time to the customer. Informed by the arrival times, the customer
12
ETA
Platform
Confirm
Delivery
Figure 1 BPMN-Model of Process from Customer Order to Meal Delivery
chooses a restaurant for delivery or decides not to order at all. If the customer does not
order, the process ends. If the customer chooses a restaurant for delivery, the dispatcher
informs the corresponding restaurant and updates the routes for the drivers. In the latter
case, the process ends when the meal arrives at the customer.
Formally, we define the RMDPEAT as a dynamic decision process. This modeling framework depicts dynamic problems as a sequence of states, decisions, and new information
(Powell 2011).
Decision Points: A decision point k occurs whenever a customer requests estimated arrival
times (see Fig. 1, “Delivery request”).
States: The state Sk at decision point k consists of the time of the request tk, the requesting
customer ck, all customers Nk that have ordered but were not served yet, the restaurants and their workloads Rk, and the set of planned routes Θk. Each restaurant is
given by a location and a queue of meals to prepare and the start of preparation time
of the first item in the queue. Each route θ ∈ Θk is a sequence of pickup and delivery
stops, called actions. Actions are given by an origin, a destination, the time when the
13
action is started or is planned to be started, and an assumed time required to perform
the action.
Decisions: Decisions are made in two stages. First, we decide on tentative route updates for
each restaurant in case the customer orders from the restaurant. Second, we estimate
arrival times for each restaurant based on the current state and the tentative routes
(see Fig. 1, “Calculate ETA for each Restaurant”). We denote the tentative routes
as Θik and the arrival time decisions as Xik := X(Sk ∪ Θik) ∈ R for every restaurant
i = 1, . . . , |Rk|. The estimated arrival times
Xik
i∈{1,...,|Rk}
are communicated to the
customer (see Fig. 1, “Offer Options”). Selecting the estimated arrival times is the
focus of this work and is described in detail in the next subsection.
Stochastic Information: We consider four sources of uncertainty: First, customers are
unknown until they request delivery and estimated arrival times. Second, meal preparation times at restaurants are uncertain. Third, parking and delivery times of drivers
are uncertain. The fourth source of uncertainty is the restaurant choice of customer
ck. Customers decide on the basis of individual preference functions Φk

(Xik)i∈{1,...,R}

.
The preference function takes a vector of estimated arrival times (one for each restaurant) as input and returns a restaurant to order from or rejection of service.
Stochastic Transitions: The stochastic transition from state Sk to state Sk+1 is induced
when a customer requests estimated arrival times. The new set of planned routes Θk+1
is the result of our routing decision and the restaurant choice of customer ck at time tk.
The new routes are updated by pruning actions that were completed between tk and
tk+1. The completion of an action depends on the realizations of stochastic parking
and meal preparation times. The restaurant workloads Rk+1 depend on the customer’s
choice and the realizations of meal preparation times. The set of customers yet to be
served Nk+1, depends on the four types of information and the routing decision.
Objective: The objectives of the RMDPEAT are twofold: Maximize the expected number
of served customers and estimate arrival times accurately. The accuracy of arrival time
estimations is measured by the expected mean squared error (MSE) per customer.
14
k
Restaurant Customer Request k
1
2
3
1
2
k
1
2
3
1
2
Customer k orders at restaurant 1
Driver
1
2
1
2
X1k =? X2k =?
Customer k orders at restaurant 2
Figure 2 State Sk, Routing Decisions
Θ1k, Θ2k

, and EAT decision
X1k, X2k

.
In this paper, we focus on the EAT in the RMPDEAT. We therefore assume the platform
routes customers using an insertion procedure - a method commonly applied in practice. We
build routes by iterating over all existing tours and all possible points of insertion for pickup
and delivery such that the sum of tour durations is minimized. We allow the bundling of
orders at same or adjacent restaurants; i.e. a driver is allowed to wait for more than one
meal before delivering them (See Appendix A.1 for results without bundling). To avoid
substantial shifts of customers in a route, we restrict the routing policy so that customers
cannot be shifted by more than 15 minutes in total due to insertions.
3.2 Estimating Arrival Times for Delivery Routing Problem
When a customer requests delivery options, a decision state for the EAT occurs. We illustrate
an exemplary decision state of the EAT in Fig. 2. Light triangles represent the drivers, gray
squares the restaurants Rk, gray circles the previously assigned customers Nk that have not
been served yet, and the light circle is a new request by the customer that induced the kth
decision state. The black arrows indicate the current routes and the dashed arrows indicate
15
tentative route updates to serve customer k. For the purpose of presentation, we omit the
depiction of assumed action times.
In this example with two restaurants, two estimated arrival times must be communicated to
the customer. Therefore, we have to consider two scenarios. In the left scenario, customer
k orders at restaurant 1. Here, driver 1 delivers a meal to customer 2, picks up the meals
of customer 3 and k at restaurant 1, serves customer 3 and then customer k. In the right
scenario, customer k orders at restaurant 2. Here, driver 2 delivers a meal to customer 1, picks
up the meal at restaurant 2 and delivers it to customer k. This decision of the EAT is based
on the state Sk and the two tentative planned routes Θ1k, Θ2k. The decision
X1k, X2k

is
subsequently communicated to the customer, who either decides on a restaurant for delivery
or refrains from ordering at all. In case the customer selects a restaurant, the tentative
planned route is implemented and followed until the next customer requests delivery.
As illustrated in the example, a state in EAT consists of a RMDPEAT state combined
with the tentative routing decision for each restaurant. In the following, we define the
decision process and the objective of EAT.
Let ck be the customer that induced the kth decision state. The corresponding RMDPEAT
decision state is given by Sk =

tk, Nk ∪ {ck}, Rk, Θk

. As customer ck has not ordered
yet, there are |Rk| + 1 potential routing decisions, one for each restaurant and one for the
option not to order. A decision state S
EAT
k
in EAT is then given by the RMDPEAT state
Sk combined with routing decisions Θik for all restaurants i = 1, . . . , |Rk|.
A decision in the EAT is a vector of estimated arrival times X(S
EAT
k
) := (Xik)i∈{1,...,|Rk|},
where each entry corresponds to a restaurant. The objective is to minimize the expected
deviance of the estimated arrival time X(S
EAT
k
)(j) from the actual arrival time A(S
EAT
k
)(j)
min
X(S
EAT
k
)(j))∈R+
ES
EAT
k

||A(S
EAT
k
)(j) − X(S
EAT
k
)(j)||2
2

, (1)
where j ∈ {1, . . . , Rk} is the restaurant that the customer will select. We choose the mean
squared error (MSE) to describe the deviance of estimated arrival times from actual arrival
times.
Evidently, there are interdependencies between the objectives of the RMDPEAT. Sophistically, one could sacrifice one to optimize the other, for example, by communicating arrival
times of zero (many services, large arrival time deviations) or by adding large amounts of
16
slack to the routing (few services, accurate arrival time predictions). While these interrelations may be worth investigating in the future, we focus on the case where the routing policy
is given and our goal is to minimize the deviation of communicated and realized arrival time.
4 Solution Approach
In the following, we present our solution approaches for EAT. We present an offline method
and an online-offline method. We motivate both methods in Section 4.1 and provide detailed
explanations in Sections 4.2 and 4.3.
4.1 Motivation
In theory, an optimal policy for EAT is achieved by selecting the expected arrival time
E

A(S
EAT
k
)

given the state S
EAT
k
. In practice, we cannot analytically determine the expected
arrival time due to uncertainty in delivery times, due to uncertainty in bundling, and due
to the interaction of the delivery and meal preparation process. When designing solution
methods for EAT, we have two conflicting objectives in mind. On the one hand, solutions
have to be fast to predict arrival times for multiple restaurants in real time. On the other
hand, solutions are required to yield accurate predictions.
One way of a near-optimal approximation of the unknown distribution of arrival times
are full online simulations of delivery and preparation process, future demand, and routing.
For such a process, the platform requires a simulator and, as we show later, substantial
runtimes per customer. We describe the procedure for a single simulation in Alg. 1. In
the procedure, we already introduce two simplifications to accelerate the simulation, both
concerning the handling of new customer requests within the simulation. First, we do not
estimate the arrival time for every restaurant before letting a simulated customer decide
based on all arrival time estimations. Instead, we iteratively communicate one estimated
time of arrival to the simulated customer. This does not change exactness of the simulation
if the assumption holds that the customer choice model can be modeled as a sequence of
yes or no decisions. Second, we use a myopic heuristic described in the next paragraph to
estimate arrival times in the simulation instead of calling Alg. 1 recursively. The procedure
17
Algorithm 1 One Full Simulation
1: Given current state (current time, new (real) customer, waiting customers, restaurants
and their workloads, current routes), assignment and routing policy
2: sample request stream (sample customers and sort by order times)
3: while new (real) customer is not served do
4: for customer in request stream do
5: transition to the next state
6: randomly permute the restaurants
7: for restaurant in permuted restaurants do
8: construct tentative route using assignment and routing policy
9: Estimate arrival time based on tentative route
10: communicate estimated arrival time to customer
11: if customer places an order (based on choice model) then
12: update routing (based on tentative route)
13: break For-Loop
14: return arrival time at new (real) customer
takes the current state as input (line 1) and simulates the arrival time of the new (real)
customer as follows: The future demand is sampled from the known temporal and spatial
distribution of requests and stored in a list sorted by order times (line 2). As long as the
current customer is not served (line 3), we iterate through each sampled customer in the
request stream (line 4). We do so by transitioning from the current state to the state at
the time of the request (line 5). We permute the restaurant list to model preferences of the
customer. For each restaurant (line 6) in the permuted list, we construct a tentative route
using a given routing and assignment policy to deliver a meal from the restaurant to the
requesting customer (line 7). We derive an estimated arrival time based on the tentative
route (line 8) using the myopic heuristic described in the next paragraph. Informed by the
estimated time of arrival (line 9), the requesting customer either chooses to order based on
their choice model (line 10) or checks the next restaurant. We update the routing (line 11)
using the previously determined tentative route and stop iterating over the restaurants if
18
the customer places an order. The procedure ends when the new (real) customer is served.
Upon completion, Alg. 1 returns the simulated arrival time at the new customer (line 12).
Leaving out our proposed simplifications, applying the procedure multiple times results in
a sampling mean that is an unbiased estimator of the expected arrival time. With increasing
numbers of simulations the sampling mean converges to the expected arrival time almost
with certainty by the strong law of large numbers. We note that our simulation is not exact
as we do not estimate arrival times during the simulation using another simulation (line 8).
As a result, our full online simulation has a small bias. This cannot be avoided without
accepting the computationally intractable runtimes of recursive simulations.
However, the runtime decrease achieved by our simplifications is a mere drop in the ocean.
Full online simulations are still very time-expensive and therefore infeasible when arrival
times have to be computed on the fly. In particular, routing and assignment decisions
(line 9) are runtime-expensive for a combinatorial problem like the one at hand. In our
experiments, we use an insertion procedure that is often applied in practice. Even such a
simple policy scales quadratic with regards to the number of actions in a route and linear
with regards to the number of vehicles in the fleet, thus cubic. In a worst-case scenario, this
heuristic is applied for every restaurant and every simulated customer request (line 4 and 6)
during a simulation run.
An alternative way of estimating the expected arrival times is by a simple sum of expected
times for each action in the route. We call this approach planning on means (PoM). By
planning on mean action times we assume the underlying RMDPEAT to be deterministic
instead of dynamic. Such a myopic approach is bound to yield inaccurate results when
the assumption of a deterministic RMDPEAT diverges from the dynamicity of the real
RMDPEAT. In particular, the uncertainty in bundling of orders is not addressed by PoM.
We illustrate this issue in Fig. 3. At t = 813 (1:33 pm), the driver intends to deliver a
meal to customer 1, to drive to the next restaurant, to pick up the food for customer 2, and
to deliver it directly. Planning on means assigns every action in the planned route a time
estimate. The arrival time estimations for customer 1 and 2 are then given by the respective
sum of estimated times. At t = 841 (2:01 pm), we observe the actual arrival times. While
the time estimate for customer 1 was only off by one minute, it was off by eight minutes for
19
Restaurant Customer
1
2
1
2
Driver
2
t=813 t=845
ETD=816
ETD=837
ATD=817
ATD=843
1
2
1
2
3
Figure 3 Exemplary Arrival Time Estimation by Planning on Means
customer 2. This is due to the request of customer 3 who ordered at the same restaurant
as customer 2. Instead of delivering the meal directly to customer 2 as assumed at t = 813
(1:33 pm), the driver waited for both meals to be prepared before delivering them.
PoM underestimates arrival times even when no bundling occurs. This is due to the fact that
PoM ignores the interaction of delivery and preparation process when estimating departure
times at restaurants:
The expected departure time E

tdep
is given by the expected value of the maximum of the
pickup time tpickup, which is the sum of travel time to the restaurant and the time required
to find a parking space, and the time when the meals are ready tcook
E

tdep
= E

max{tpickup, tcook}

. (2)
As PoM assumes deterministic information, it approximates the expected departure time by
max{E

tpickup
, E

tcook
}. (3)
PoM is biased because approximation (3) is likely to underestimates the departure time, as
we show in the following.
20
Lemma 1. Let X, Y be random variables. Then,
E[max(X, Y )] ≥ max(E[X], E[Y ])
Proof. We use the identity
max(X, Y ) = X + Y + |X − Y |
2
(4)
and the inequality
E[|X|] ≥ |E[X]| (5)
as well as the linearity of the expected value to show the claim:
E[max(X, Y )] (4)
= E
"
X + Y + |X − Y |
2
#
(lin.)
=
E[X] + E[Y ] + E[|X − Y |]
2
(5)
≥
E[X] + E[Y ] + |E[X − Y ]|
2
(lin.)
=
E[X] + E[Y ] + |E[X] − E[Y ]|
2
(4)
= max
E[X], E[Y ]

.
(6)
Corollary 1.
E

tdep
≥ max{E

tpickup
, E

tcook
}. (7)
Proof. The inequality follows directly from Lemma 1.
In summary, full online simulations and PoM are two extremes in terms of the accuracyruntime trade-off. While full online simulations are highly accurate, they are too slow for
application. In contrast, PoM predicts arrival times instantly but inaccurately. In the
following, we propose two methods, a pure offline and an online-offline method, that alleviate
the shortcomings of PoM and full online simulations while preserving their advantages. The
offline method addresses the short-sightedness of planning on means while retaining its speed.
It can be applied whenever historical data is available and does not require a simulator at
all. It learns the residuals of PoM, i.e. the difference of estimated arrival times and actual
21
arrival times, by means of gradient boosted decision trees (GBDTs). For that purpose, we
derive a low-dimensional feature space that describes key information of the EAT decision
space. The features account for all sources of uncertainty and enable the offline method to
compensate for the bias of planning on means.
We also present an online-offline method that can be integrated in the simulator potentially already employed by the platform. The online-offline method drastically decreases the
computation time of full online simulations by approximating the routing policy while preserving their accuracy. Our online-offline method learns the decision making of the routing
and assignment policy offline with the help of a deep neural network (DNN). We employ the
trained DNN online to perform simulations in a fraction of the time previously required.
4.2 Offline Method
As we have seen, planning on means ignores the uncertainty in bundling and the uncertainty
in synchronisation of delivery and meal preparation process. We implement a method to
account for the short-sightedness of PoM by approximating its residuals with the help of
supervised learning. To address the high dimensionality of the state space, we use a set of
features that encode the state space in a suitable format for our supervised learning model.
In the following, we describe approximation procedure and feature selection.
4.2.1 Approximation Procedure
When predicting residuals, we decide for a classical machine learning approach over a deep
learning approach. This way, we decrease training time, which will be of importance for
our extensive analysis in Section 6, and ensure interpretability of our model with regards
to the handcrafted features (Du et al. 2019). We choose a gradient boosted decision tree
(GBDT) model for predicting the residuals. GBDT is a common method in the machine
learning community that has shown success in various machine learning challenges (Bissacco
et al. 2007, Hutchinson et al. 2011, Pittman and Brown 2011, Wang et al. 2017). GBDT
is an additive ensemble of decision trees, where each tree partitions the feature space into
disjoint regions and assigns a constant value to each region. A single decision tree is prone
to overtraining. GBDT alleviates this issue by summing up several small trees. The decision
22
trees are trained sequentially using steepest descent by fitting the residual error of the current
model. In the following, we give a short introduction into GBDT. For a detailed description,
the reader is referred to Friedman (2001). Let x be a point in the feature space. A single
decision tree is given by
f(x) = X
J
j=1
bj1{x∈Rj}, (8)
where J is the number of terminal nodes in the tree and {Rj}
J
j=1 are disjoint regions that
cover the feature space. {bj}
J
j=1 are the constant values corresponding to the regions Rj
.
The additive ensemble is sequentially trained by adding a tree in every step:
Fm(x) = Fm−1(x) + ρm
X
J
j=1
bjm1{x∈Rjm}. (9)
Here, the index m denotes the tree from the mth iteration and Fm consists of m trees. The
scaling factor ρm is the result of a line search using steepest descent. Let y denote the
residual of planning on means that corresponds to x and let L

y, F(X)

be a loss function.
Then, the direction of steepest descent for the data pair (x, y) is given by
−gm(x) = −
"
∂L
y, Fm(x)

∂Fm(x)
#
. (10)
Finally, ρm can be derived from the line search
ρm = arg min
ρ
Ex,yL

y, Fm−1(x) − ρgm(x)

. (11)
Training decision trees is time consuming. Finding the best split points in the feature space
is a complex task that grows more difficult when the number of training samples or the
number of considered features increase. The lightGBM implementation of GBDT models
(Ke et al. 2017) addresses this limitation. It effectively reduces training samples by keeping
those with large gradients and randomly dropping samples with low gradients. Additionally,
Ke et al. (2017) introduces an almost lossless approach to bundle features, thus reducing the
feature space. We employ the lightGBM -GBDT model for our computational study.
4.2.2 Feature Selection
We select features with two conflicting objectives in mind: We want to minimize the prediction error of our supervised learning model while keeping the dimension of our feature space
23
small to avoid the curse of dimensionality. Additionally, we want features to be robust with
respect to changes in the fleet size or in the number of restaurants. This way, the model can
be employed even when the fleet size or the set of restaurants changes. In the following, we
present all features considered. We group them into four classes: temporal features, spatial
features, routing features, and process features. We intend the features to enable the model
to anticipate future bundling and delay due to synchronisation of delivery process and meal
preparation process.
Temporal Features. We propose two temporal features that account for the temporal
uncertainty in customer requests. The features
• order time: Order time (daytime in minutes)
• eta pom: Arrival time estimated by PoM (daytime in minutes)
lay the time frame in which bundling might occur. We expect our method to shift an
arrival time estimated by PoM to a later time if the time frame is during peak lunch or
dinner time. The arrival time estimated by PoM also gives an estimate on the length
of the tour to the customer.
Spatial Features. The spatial locations of customer and restaurant influence arrival times.
If customer and restaurant location span an axis along areas with ample potential
customers and restaurants future bundling might be more likely. As a consequence, our
method might correct the arrival time estimated by PoM to a slightly later time. For
that reason, we propose two spatial features that address capture spatial information:
• customer location: Customer location (block index of a 64 × 64 grid)
• restaurant location: Restaurant location (block index of a 64 × 64 grid)
We fit a 64 × 64 grid onto the service area to represent two-dimensional locations. A
location is encoded as an integer block index i ∈ {0, . . . , 4095} of the fitted grid.
Route Features. The length and structure of the route substantially shapes the likelihood
of future bundling, the magnitude of uncertainty in parking and preparation, and
delays due to process synchronisations. We propose five route features. The first three
24
features describe the structure of the route. The last two features account for the
shift-constraint of our insertion policy. The constraint asserts that a delivery to a
customer must not be delayed by more than 15 minutes due to bundling. Information
on previous shifts due to bundling enables the model to better estimate the likelihood
of future delays due to rerouting that affect the new customer.
• n stops: Number of stops in the route
• n pickup stops: Number of pickup stops in the route before the customer is served
• n delivery stops: Number of delivery stops before the customer is served
• max shift before: Maximal time shift due to past insertions/bundling (in minutes)
over all customers in the route that are served before the new customer
• max shift after : Maximal time shift due to past insertions/bundling (in minutes)
over all customers in the route that are served after the new customer
Process Features. Finally, we use a single feature to address the uncertainty in processing
times:
• prep time: Estimated time until the meal is prepared by the restaurant based on
expected preparation times (in minutes)
With the help of the estimated process time and the route features, the method is
able to refine the approximation bias (see Corollary 1) when estimating wait times at
restaurants.
We train and employ the GBDT using above features. The method can be trained exclusively
on historical data and does not require a simulator to obtain training data. It is therefore
instantly applicable for platforms that do not employ simulators.
4.3 Combination of Offline and Online Methods
In the previous section, we derived an offline method that is fast but uses aggregated data.
More detailed estimations are obtained by full online simulations (see Alg. 1). However,
full online simulations are computational infeasible when arrival times have to be computed
25
in real time for multiple restaurants. We exploit an offline approximation of the routing
policy to derive an online simulation that estimates arrival times on the fly. This is achieved
by training a DNN to imitate a given routing policy. The new approximate routing policy
replaces the exact routing policy in line 7 of Alg. 1. Furthermore, we remove the for-loop
in line 6 by assuming that customers choose the restaurant for delivery uninformed and
uniformly random.
In the following, we describe our approach. As for the definition of the offline approach,
we divide this subsection into approximation procedure and feature selection.
4.3.1 Approximation Procedure
We present the architecture of our DNN before we provide details on our approximate online simulation. The DNN requires information on the customer, the restaurant, and the
vehicle. It returns two output vectors that predict the insertion point for restaurant as well
as customer into the vehicle’s route. Each output vector is computed by a head of fully
connected layers. The output represents a likelihood distribution over all insertion points.
The customer’s insertion point depends on the insertion point of the restaurant, because the
customer is served after the pickup at the restaurant. For this reason, we feed the likelihood
distribution over the restaurant insertion points back into the DNN to guide it determine
the customer insertion point. The entire model is depicted in Fig. 4. In the following, we
describe each step in the DNN model. Steps 1 to 6 describe a forward pass applying the
DNN while steps 7 to 10 describe a backward pass training the DNN.
1. The normalized input vector v of length N is forwarded to the input layer. The vector
is later described in the feature section.
2. The input layer consists of a single linear layer with a ReLu activation.
3. The resulting vector is forwarded to the first head of fully connected layers. We use
four layers with 128 nodes each. All layers are followed by a batch normalization, and
a ReLu activation. The layers are concluded by a linear layer of r(N) nodes. Here,
r(N) denotes the number of possible insertion points for the restaurant.
26
Fully Connected Layers F
Softmax Fully Connected Layers F
Softmax
Cross-Entropy
Cross-Entropy
Backpropagation
Fully Connected Layer
Insertion Point
Distribution Restaurant
Insertion Point
Distribution Customer
1/3
2/3
2
1
3
4 5
7 6
8
9
10
Figure 4 DNN Routing Model
4. The r(N) dimensional output vector is forwarded to a softmax activation. The resulting
output is a likelihood distribution over the r(N) potential insertion points. The index
with maximal likelihood is used as the insertion point for the restaurant.
5. The route embedding from step 4 and the output vector from step 6 are concatenated
and forwarded to the second head of fully connected layers because the customer can
only be inserted after the restaurant. We use the same structure as in the first head of
fully connected layers. The only difference is a linear output layer of size c(N). This
time, c(N) denotes the number of possible insertion points for the customer.
6. The c(N) dimensional output vector is forwarded to a softmax activation. The resulting
output is a likelihood distribution over the c(N) potential insertion points. The index
with maximal likelihood is used as the insertion point for the customer.
7. The cross-entropy loss between the likelihood distribution for the customer insertion
point and the true customer insertion point is computed.
8. The cross-entropy loss between the likelihood distribution for the restaurant insertion
point and the true restaurant insertion point is computed.
27
9. A linear combination of both losses is computed. We weight the customer loss by 2/3
and the restaurant loss by 1/3. This is done for practical reasons as the customer loss
is harder to learn.
10. The resulting loss is backpropagated through the entire neural network.
We use the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba 2014) to train the DNN. Adam is the default
optimization method in many deep learning applications. In contrast to classical stochastic
gradient-descent, which uses fixed learning rates, it computes adaptive learning rates for
each parameter based on the first and second moments of the gradient. We use a cosine
annealing learning rate strategy with warm restarts (Loshchilov and Hutter 2016). Warm
restarts are known to improve rate of convergence in gradient-based optimization. Within
each iteration the learning rate is decayed by cosine annealing to enforce convergence after
the warm restart.
With the help of the trained DNN, a routing decision for a given vehicle can be performed
in O(C) time, in contrast to the O(|θ|
2
) time required by our simple insertion policy. Here,
C denotes the number of elementary operations required for one forward pass of the neural
network and |θ| denotes the number of actions in the route. The approximate routing and
assignment policy is described in Alg. 2 and is summarized as follows: For each route, we
predict the insertion points of customer and restaurant with the help of the DNN. If an insertion point is infeasible, restaurant and customer are appended to the end of the respective
route. Else, we insert pickup and delivery according to the prediction. We choose a route
from the resulting tentative routes based on the given assignment policy. Using the approximate routing and assignment policy we perform online-offline simulations as detailed in Alg.
3. The procedure is summarized as follows: When a customer requests delivery, we simulate
the delivery process until the customer is served. We sample new requests according to the
temporal and spatial distribution of orders. Each sampled customer requests delivery from a
restaurant chosen uniformly random. We update the routing according to our approximate
routing and assignment policy (see Alg. 2). When the new customer is served, we store the
simulated arrival time. Multiple simulations yield an empirical distribution of arrival times.
We estimate the arrival time by the mean of the empirical distribution. Though, we could
28
Algorithm 2 Approximate Routing and Assignment Policy
1: Given current state, customer, restaurant, assignment policy
2: tentative routes = ∅
3: for route in routes do
4: predict insertion point for pickup and delivery using DNN
5: if prediction is feasible then
6: insert pickup and delivery according to prediction
7: else
8: append pickup and delivery to the end of the route
9: tentative routes ← tentative routes ∪ route
10: choose route from tentative routes with the help of the assignment policy
11: return route
Algorithm 3 One Approximate Simulation
1: Given current state (current time, requesting customer, waiting customers, restaurants
and their workloads, current routes)
2: sample request stream (customers and sorted order times)
3: while current customer is not served do
4: for customer in request stream do
5: update state
6: place an order at the given restaurant
7: update routing according to approx. routing and assignment policy
8: return Arrival time at new customer
also derive confidence bands on the arrival time, for example, to communicate a delivery
time window to the customer.
We note that the approximate routing policy introduces further bias into our estimator.
Whenever the DNN predicts an infeasible insertion point, we append restaurant and customer
at the end of the respective route. Therefore, we underestimate the likelihood of bundling.
Consequently, the predicted arrival time is likely to underestimates the actual arrival time.
Our computational study shows that this bias is smaller than one minute.
29
4.3.2 Feature Selection
We assume that each route consists of a maximum of N actions. We choose N large enough
such that no route can have more than N actions. Each action describes either a pickup at a
restaurant or a delivery to a customer. We represent an action by a five-dimensional vector.
• Action type (Pickup or delivery),
• Location of action (x- and y-coordinate),
• Estimated time required to perform the, action (in minutes)
• Total time that the customer was delayed by insertion policy (0 if pickup action).
If the route has less than N actions, we pad the input vector with zeros.
In addition to the route, the DNN is given
• Customer position (x- and y-coordinate),
• Restaurant position (x- and y-coordinate),
• Estimated time until the meal is prepared (in minutes).
In total, the neural network receives 5 · (N + 1) input parameters. The maximal possible
length of a route N depends on various factors. We observe that N = 12 is sufficiently large
for our computational study, described in the next section.
5 Computational Study
In the following, we present our computational study. Experiments were conducted on the
North-German Supercomputing Alliance HLRN-IV-System Lise at Zuse Institute Berlin. We
used one node equipped with 364 GB working memory that consists of two CPUs with 48
cores each. Training the GBDT requires only a few minutes and training our DNN takes
less than a day.
This section is structured as follows: Section 5.1 describes the experimental design. Section 5.2 explains the parametrization of our models. Finally, Section 5.3 compares the quality
of all proposed EAT policies.
30
5.1 Design of Experiments
In this section, we describe the experimental design that forms the basis of our computational
study. First, we present the spatial and temporal distribution of requesting customers and
their ordering behavior. Second, we define the restaurant locations and the distribution of
times required to prepare meals. Third, we describe the fleet of delivery drivers, their travel
times, and their distribution of parking times.
5.1.1 Customers
The customer locations are taken from the RMDP data set http://ir.uiowa.edu/tippie_
pubs/69. The data set includes 32853 unique customer locations in Iowa City. We assume
that customers spontaneously request meal deliveries throughout the day (0 minutes to 1440
minutes). We set the expected number of requests to 450. The requests are split into
lunch time requests and dinner time requests. We model the lunch time distribution as
N (µ = 720, σ = 60) and the dinner time distribution as N (µ = 1080, σ = 60). Following
the results of Dai and Liu (2019), we model the dinner demand slightly higher than the
lunch demand. Each day, we sample n
lunch ∼ N (µ = 200, σ = 10) times from the lunch
time distribution and n
dinner ∼ N (µ = 250, σ = 10) times from the dinner time distribution.
The resulting bimodal distribution of delivery requests over time is illustrated in Fig. 5
(left). The x-axis shows the daytime in minutes and the y-axis the relative frequency of
requests. In our experiments, we discretize request times to steps of one minute. For each
request, we determine the estimated time of arrival for every given restaurant. Informed by
the estimated arrival times, the requesting customer decides for a restaurant and places an
order. We define the customer choice model Φk as follows: We assume that customers have
an ordered set of potential restaurants to order from as well as a maximum time they are
willing to wait for delivery. Thus, we model their choices by a list of restaurants ordered
by the customer’s preference and an arrival time threshold. Each customer iterates through
their list up to the first restaurant where the ETA is below the threshold. Else, the customer
rejects delivery service. In our main experiments, we assume that all restaurants are part
of each list and that all customers have a delivery threshold of 60 minutes after time of
order. We also assume that the positioning in the list is uniformly distributed among the
31
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Customer
Restaurant
2 km
Figure 5 Temporal (left) and Spatial (right) Distribution of Requests
restaurants. This leads to customers choosing uniformly random from all restaurants with
an estimated arrival time of less than one hour. In our analysis in Section 6, we later vary
both list lengths and threshold to model more and less selective customer behavior.
5.1.2 Restaurant
We consider 15 restaurants in our computational study. The restaurants are representatives
of the 110 restaurants present in the data set chosen by means of a 15-medoid clustering.
The spatial distribution of restaurants and customers in Iowa City is illustrated in Fig. 5
(right). The x- and y-axis denote the coordinates of locations in kilometers. Grey dots
depict the location of customer requests and black square indicate restaurant locations.
Restaurants are characterized by a location and a sequence of meals to prepare. The time
required to prepare a meal is modeled equally for all restaurants by a log-normal distribution
LN (µ = 8, σ = 1.3). We assume that restaurants prepare meals sequentially and in first-infirst-out fashion. We only know if a meal is ready when the assigned driver arrives at the
restaurant.
5.1.3 Fleet
We assume a homogeneous fleet of drivers with unlimited capacity. In practice, drivers
serve between two and three customers per hour. We have a time frame of approximately
32
ten hours where customers request. Therefore, we choose 15 drivers to satisfy the expected
demand of 450 customers per day in the given time frame. The travel times are deterministic
and derived from the Euclidean distance between location and destination. Travel times are
rounded up to the next minute. We assume drivers to have a constant velocity of 30 km/h.
The time to find a parking spot at a restaurant or customer is modeled by the normal
distribution N (µ = 2.5, σ = 0.5). Like travel times, parking times are rounded up to the
next minute.
5.2 Parametrization of Methods
In the following, we provide an overview of the parametrizations of our methods and their
impact.
5.2.1 Offline Method
We set the GBDT model to 1000 individual decision trees with a maximal depth of 5 and a
maximum of 10 final nodes. Each final node contains a minimum of 400 training samples.
The learning rate is set to 0.02. The hyperparameters were chosen manually and are not the
result of hyperparameter optimization.
Training.
We train the GBDT until the validation loss does not improve over the course of 500 iterations. To train the GBDT, we simulate 1960 day (20 days on each of the 96 cores) with an
average of 450 customers per day. We randomly split the data into 80% training samples
and 20% validation samples. The learning curve for training the GBDT model is depicted
in Fig. 6 (left). The x-axis shows the number of training iterations and the y-axis shows
the MSE of the model on the validation samples. The dashed line represents the validation
set and the solid line represents the training set. We observe a smooth convergence of the
model and an negligible overfit of the training data. However, 1920 days of data might not
be available in practice. To test if less data suffices, we plot the performance of the model in
dependence of the number of training samples seen. For that purpose, we randomly sample
subsets of size {1000, 2000, 3000, . . . , 100000}. For each sample size, we train the model on
33
Figure 6 Learning Curve of GBDT Model (left) and MSE in Dependence of Number
of Training Samples (right)
the corresponding subset to convergence. We validate the models on the same validation
set. Fig. 6 (right) shows the result of our experiment. The x-axis denotes the size of the
training set while the y-axis shows the MSE on the validation set. The figure suggests that
it is sufficient to train the GBDT model with 100000 samples (≈ 222 days) to achieve a
performance comparable with our model that was trained on approximately 864000 samples
(1920 days).
Features.
We use Shapley values to analyze the relative contribution of our handcrafted features to
the model output. Shapley values origin from coalitional game theory. It is a method to
fairly assign rewards to different parties depending on their contribution to the total payout.
In our case, the parties are the features and the total payout is the model output. For a
detailed explanation of Shapley values, the reader is referred to Molnar (2019). We evaluate
the features with respect to their mean absolute Shapley value. Furthermore, we evaluate
the feature importance by iteratively leaving out one feature and keeping all others in the
training of our method. We illustrate the mean absolute Shapley value of each feature and
the model performance without the feature in Fig. 7. The lower x-axis corresponds to the
black bars and depicts the mean absolute Shapley value. The upper x-axis corresponds to
the gray bars and depicts the MSE of the model without the feature. The feature names are
34
Figure 7 Mean Absolute Shapley Values and Model Performance without Feature
given by the y-axis. The vertical dashed line marks the MSE of the model using all features.
All features are important as we can see by the gap between the model performance using all
features (vertical dashed line) and the model performance when one feature is dropped (gray
bars). However, we observe that temporal features (arrival time estimated by PoM and order
time) have the highest impact on the model. In particular, the arrival time estimated by
PoM is required to predict the residuals accurately. Without the feature, the MSE increases
from 26.77 to 53.29. For all other features, we observe a less severe effect when dropping the
feature.
5.2.2 Online-Offline Method
We train the DNN over 6 cycles of the cosine annealing learning rate strategy. We start
with an initial cycle of 10 epochs and double the length of each subsequent cycle. In total,
the network is trained for 630 epochs. During each cycle, we decay the learning rate from
0.001 to 0 by cosine annealing. A comparison of different learning rate strategies and the
corresponding learning curves is entailed in Appendix A.2, Fig. 13. We use a batch size of
35
Figure 8 Training and Validation Cross-Entropy Loss (left) and Validation Accuracy
of DNN for Predicting Insertion of Pickup and Delivery (right)
200 samples with each sample being a 65 dimensional vector. Again, we use 1920 training
days and split them into 80% training and 20% validation data. The resulting cross-entropy
loss for training and validation set is illustrated in Fig. 8 (left). The accuracy for predicting
the insertion point for pickup and delivery on the validation set is depicted in Fig. 8 (right).
The x-axis of both figures denotes the number of epochs trained. In the left figure, the black
line shows the training loss and the grey line shows the validation loss. The y-axis of the
left figure denotes the unweighted sum of cross-entropies for predicting pickup and delivery
insertion. In the right figure, the black line corresponds to pickup insertion predictions and
the gray line corresponds to delivery insertion predictions. On the y-axis, we show the mean
accuracy on the validation set. The discontinuities in both graphs are the result of a sudden
increase in learning rate caused by the cosine annealing learning rate strategy. We observe
that the DNN provides very high accuracy. It predicts pickup insertions with an accuracy
of 94% and delivery insertions with an accuracy of 93%.
5.3 Approximation Quality
In this section, we compare the quality of the different EAT policies. Each EAT policy
leads to different arrival time estimations, different customer selections, and different future
states. To ensure a fair comparison of all EAT policies, we do not communicate the arrival
36
time determined by each EAT policy but always use the arrival time derived by PoM in our
experiments. This leads to the same EAT decision states for every policy (In Appendix A.3,
we show that applying our offline method as EAT policy leads to rather minor differences
in approximation quality even though the offline method is trained on the PoM data). We
compare all policies on a validation instance of 50 days with an average of 450 customers
per day.
In Section 4, we stated that our solution methods address the shortcomings of planning on
means and full online simulations. Our offline method is designed to be as fast as PoM while
tackling PoM’s inherent myopia. Our online-offline method aims to reduce the computation
time required for full online simulations while retaining their accuracy. Thus, we analyze the
policies with respect to MSE and mean runtime per customer request.
The detailed results of our computational study are presented in Tab. 7 in Appendix A.4.
An overview of the MSE and mean runtime of all methods is illustrated in Fig. 9. The x-axis
states the policy employed. The left y-axis, with its corresponding black bars, denotes the
MSE of the policy on the validation set and the right y-axis, with its corresponding gray
bars, denotes the mean runtime in seconds to predict a single arrival time. We simulate
n = 32 times in our online and online-offline method. We are limited to 32 simulations
due to the high computational costs of the online method. We use the mean runtime of a
single simulation and a single restaurant for our online-offline method and the online method.
This is justified because multiple simulations might be performed in parallel (theoretically).
Fig. 9 highlights the unfavorable accuracy-runtime trade-off of PoM and online simulations
and the favorable trade-off of our proposed methods. PoM has low runtime but a high
MSE and online simulations have a high runtime but a low MSE. In contrast, both of our
proposed methods have low runtimes and low MSEs. Our offline method’s computational
time is comparable to planning on means. Both require less than a centisecond to predict
arrival times. GBDT halves the MSE of planning on means and is, in contrast to planning on
means, an unbiased estimator of the expected time of arrival (see the mean error in Tab. 7).
Our online-offline method is an order of magnitude faster than exact online simulations. This
is to be expected as we reduced the computational complexity from cubic to quadratic. Our
policy also avoids extremely high runtimes of more than 10 seconds up to even more than
37
Figure 9 Comparison of MSE and Mean Runtime of EAT Policies
one minute per customer, restaurant, and simulation run observed for the online simulation
(see Appendix A.2 for more detail). Our online-offline method’s accuracy compares to the
accuracy of full online simulations. However, the online-offline simulation comes with a small
bias (see mean error in Tab. 7). The bias is likely caused by infeasible predictions of the
DNN as we discussed in Section 4.3.
A more detailed insight on the quality of the methods is given by Fig. 10. In the figure,
we compare the density estimation of the distribution of residuals of all EAT policies. The
x-axis shows the prediction error in minutes. The y-axis shows the relative frequency of the
error. We observe that PoM (solid line) has a second mode between 5 and 20 minutes. This
indicates that PoM ignores bundling. The distribution of residuals of all other policies lack
this second mode. This is a strong indicator that our proposed methods are accounting for
uncertainty in bundling.
38
20 10 0 10 20 30
Deviance from actual time of delivery (in min)
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
Frequency (relative)
Planning on Means
Offline
Online-Offline (n=32)
Online (n=32)
Figure 10 Comparison of Residuals of our Benchmark Policies over 50 Days
6 Analysis
In this section, we analyze the impact of employing our offline method on the RMDPEAT
process. We do not consider our online-offline method as its higher runtime becomes noticeable when a great number of experiments have to be conducted. From a model point of view,
we analyze the robustness of our offline method when employed on a setting dissimilar to
the training setting. From a customer point of view, we analyze the effect of different choice
models and customer locations. From the restaurant point of view, we analyze the impact
of location, advertisement, and reliability on the restaurants’ popularity and the platform’s
overall performance. Every experiment is conducted on a new instance of 1920 days with
our offline method as EAT policy.
39
Table 2 Robustness of the Offline Method w.r.t. Changes in Restaurants, Fleet, and
Demand
Instance Modifications MSE (PoM)
MSE (Offline
w/o Retraining)
MSE (Offline
w/ Retraining)
Restaurants 53.02 26.59 26.45
Drivers 40.79 27.84 27.28
Demand 76.87 43.46 39.62
All 58.08 30.39 30.15
6.1 Ready For Growth.
Platforms always aim on growing their restaurant and customer base. We chose features for
our GBDT model in Section 4.2 to allow for such changes in demand, fleet size, and number of
restaurants (However, the small gap between offline method and online simulation indicates
that the loss when choosing features independent of fleet size and number of restaurants is
relatively small). The advantage of our feature selection is that we can apply our trained
method even when business grows. In the following, we analyze how such changes impact
our solution quality.
To this end, we probe the robustness of our offline method on four new test settings.
In the first three settings, we increase either the fleet size to 20, available restaurants to
20, or demand to 585 expected customers per day (thus, by 30%); in the fourth setting we
incorporate all three changes at once. We take our GBDT model from the standard instance
described in Section 5.1 and employ it without retraining as EAT policy on the four test
instances. For each instance, we use PoM and a GBDT model that was retrained on the
new instance as benchmarks. The resulting MSE for each instance and each considered
EAT policy is displayed in Tab. 2. As in the previous experiments, both offline methods
always outperform PoM. There are no substantial differences between the MSE of our offline
methods with and without retraining. The slight improvement in accuracy when retraining
the method is most noticeably when the demand increases without an increase in drivers or
restaurants. This might be explained by an increased likelihood of bundling. The results
40
further highlight the robustness of our proposed offline method. In particular, when business grows evenly the accuracy of our method remains constant. Thus, our method is well
prepared to handle business growth.
6.2 The Role of the Customer
In this section, we analyze changes in customer behavior. So far, we assumed that customers
choose from all restaurants but reject restaurants with an estimated time of arrival higher
than 60 minutes. However, customers might be more selective in their restaurant choice or
they might be more or less patient. We design two experiments to investigate the impact of
different customer behavior on wait times of customers, on accuracy of arrival time estimations, on the chances of customers to order from their favorite restaurants, and on rate of
rejection. Furthermore, we investigate how the location of a customer affects their service
experience.
Patience Pays Off.
First, we analyze patience. To this end, we keep the instance setting but vary the delivery
time threshold, i.e., the maximum time a customer is willing to wait for delivery. We consider
five different settings from very impatient customer behavior (30 minutes) to very patient
customer behavior (90 minutes) in steps of 15 minutes. Tab. 3 shows the obtained results.
The first row states the time threshold (in minutes), i.e. the patience level of customers.
The second row compares the MSE of the PoM and offline policy. The third row states the
mean wait time of customers. The fourth row shows the percentage of customers that order
at their favorite restaurant (the first in their list), second favorite restaurant, third favorite
restaurant, or that did not order at all. Our offline method yields a lower MSE than PoM
on all instances. We also observe that the prediction quality of our offline method is less
affected by the different patience levels than PoM is. Customer wait time increases with
the patience levels of customers but begins to plateau at a wait time of approximately 50
minutes. The initial increase in wait time is expected as higher patience levels also allow
for longer trips and more orders. The convergence of wait times might be explained by
the percent of customers that choose from their favorite restaurant: When customers are
41
Table 3 Customer Order Behavior For Different Time Constraints
Time Constraint 30 45 60 75 90
PoM 28.1 49.0 57.7 60.7 61.7
MSE (ETA)
GBDT 17.1 28.6 31.1 29.5 28.6
Mean Wait Time 25.0 34.3 42.1 47.5 50.6
1st choice 36.3 53.2 70.2 85.2 94.9
2nd choice 14.8 13.7 11.7 7.5 3.3
3rd choice 8.8 7.6 5.5 2.9 0.9
% of customers
that ordered at
Rejected 13.3 6.0 1.9 0.4 0.0
willing to wait no more than 30 minutes, only 36.3% order at their favorite restaurant.
In contrast, if customers are willing to wait up to one and a half hour 94.9% order from
their favorite restaurant. The data suggests that the distribution of restaurant workloads
converges to a uniform distribution when patience increases. Consequently, the mean wait
time of customers also converges. We also observe a convergence of the rejection rate. The
rejection rate decreases with increasing patience levels. 13.3% of customers willing to wait
only 30 minutes do not order. When customers are willing to wait one hour for their meal,
only 1.9% do not order. When the patience level further increases to one and a half hour,
all customers order. Overall, we observe a strong impact of customer patience on served
customers, average delivery times, and restaurant workload. Thus, knowing a customer’s
patience level might be very valuable for a platform.
You Can’t Always Get What You Want.
Customers may be very obstinate in their restaurant choice; in an extreme scenario, a customer may only consider one restaurant to order from. Instead of modifying customers’
patience level, we restrict the restaurants customers consider to a random subset in our next
experiment. A subset of a given size is sampled from the set of restaurants individually for
every customer. We test the impact of selective customers on 5 different settings with 1, 3, 5,
7, and 15 considered restaurants. The MSE, mean wait time, and rejection rate for different
subset sizes are shown in Tab. 4. We see that the MSE and mean wait time increase when
42
Table 4 Customer Order Behavior Depending on Number of Restaurants a Customer
Considers Ordering From
# Restaurants to choose from 1 3 5 7 15
PoM 46.8 53.6 55.9 57.5 57.7
MSE (ETA)
GBDT 24.1 27.8 29.2 29.8 31.1
Mean Wait Time 38.4 40.6 41.2 41.5 42.1
% Rejected 13.2 6.3 4.2 3.2 1.9
the number of restaurants to choose from increases. Both observations might be connected
to the increased rejection rate when only few options are given. As a result, fewer customers
are served in total. This lowers the chance of bundling and allows for more accurate arrival
time estimations. Fewer requests also lead to a lower utilization of the fleet, which allows
for faster delivery. This might also explain why only 13.2% of customer reject to order when
only one restaurant is considered compared to 29.8% of customers that did not order from
their favorite restaurant in the last experiment (see Tab. 3). Nonetheless, a rejection rate
of 13.8% due to very selective customers constitutes an enormous loss in revenue. Hence,
platforms may think about countermeasures to keep picky customers happy.
Things Will Be Great When You’re Downtown.
When customer are very selective in their restaurant choice, a customer that is not offered
a “feasible” restaurant might have bad luck. However, even when customers are very open
in their restaurant choice, the absence of feasible restaurants might be rooted in spatial discrimination. In the next experiment, we consider fairness aspects of restaurant meal delivery.
Fig. 11 depicts the density estimation of ordering (left) and rejecting customers (right). The
x- and y-axes denote the position in kilometers of the customers. Black squares represent
restaurant locations. The contours illustrate different density levels that are specified by the
number on the contour. The plots highlight that ordering and rejecting customers do not
follow the same spatial distribution. While ordering customers are located prominently in
downtown Iowa City, customers that rejected service are located disproportionately in the
outskirts of the city. In particular the east of the city, where few restaurants are nearby, has
43
Figure 11 Kernel Density Estimation of Ordering Customers (left) and Rejecting
Customers (right)
significantly more rejecting customers than other districts. We conclude that the location
of a customer strongly determines the offered service level, and, as with many instant delivery applications, a systematic spatial discrimination can be observed (Howland 2016; Chen
et al. 2020). Restaurant meal delivery platforms should therefore either limit their service
area or focus on mechanisms to ensure service in the outskirts of the city, for example, by
reserving vehicles for deliveries in these regions or by recruiting restaurants in areas with
a high demand but low restaurant density. In the next section, we analyze the impact of
location from the point of view of the restaurant.
6.3 The Role of the Restaurant
In this section, we analyze the effect of location, advertisement, and unreliability on a restaurant’s popularity.
Location, Location, Location.
In the previous section, we observed a spatial bias towards downtown customers. We now
show that this bias also holds for restaurants, even though the customer preferences are
44
Figure 12 Spatial Distribution of Relative Deviation from Mean Restaurant Workload
homogeneous over the restaurants. To analyze the distribution of orders over restaurants,
we calculate the relative deviation from mean restaurant workload of every restaurant. The
results are illustrated in Fig. 12 following the structure of Fig. 5. The shade of the restaurant
squares indicate the relative deviation of the restaurant’s workload from the overall mean
restaurant workload. We see that restaurants in the east-center of the city have workloads
significantly higher than the mean workload. In contrast, restaurants in the northern outskirts of the city have a demand noticeably lower than the mean workload. Proximity of
a restaurant to densely populated areas favors the restaurant due to low delivery times.
Therefore, the observed inequalities can be explained by the high customer density in the
city-center and low customer density in the northern parts of the city. The experiment
stresses that restaurant workload is not uniformly distributed because of given spatial fac45
Table 5 Effect of Advertising One Restaurant
Restaurant Workload
Increase in Orders
of Advertised Restaurant
Decrease in
Overall Orders
Low 59.9% (+13.4) 0.1% (-0.5)
Average 51.9% (+15.0) 0.3% (-1.2)
High 38.9% (+13.2) 0.3% (-1.2)
tors. It also may guide platforms to recruit restaurants in high demand areas or even install
their own kitchens.
The Impact of Advertisement.
In our main experiments, we assumed customers’ restaurant preferences to be homogeneous.
However, there are means to increase restaurant popularity, for example, by advertisement
or low delivery fees (Glaeser et al. 2020). In the following, we analyze the impact of such
increased popularity. To this end, we consider three settings. In each setting, we increase
popularity for one restaurant; the restaurant with the lowest workload, a restaurant with an
average workload, and the restaurant with the highest workload. In each setting, customers
are twice as likely to choose the advertised restaurant compared to all other restaurants. The
increase in orders for the respective restaurant and the overall relative and absolute decrease
of orders per day are shown in Tab. 5. We observe that advertisement has the strongest
relative effect on the restaurants with below-average workload. The relative effect decreases
for the restaurant with average workload and is lowest for the restaurant with the highest
workload. Surprisingly, all advertised restaurants had the same absolute daily increase in
orders. We also observe an increased rejection rate when restaurants with a higher workload
are advertised. An explanation could be their higher disparity in restaurant workloads. This
effectively binds more vehicles to a single area and leaves other areas understaffed.
Unreliable Restaurants Jeopardize Themselves and the Platform.
In our main experiments, we assumed that all restaurants are equally reliable in their preparation times. In our final analysis, we test the effect of a restaurant that “misbehaves” by
46
Table 6 Effect of Increased Uncertainty for the Meal Preparation of One Restaurant
Increase in MSE Decrease in Orders
Restaurant Workload Restaurant Overall Restaurant Overall
Low 66.2% 6.1% 7.4% (-1.6) 0.1% (-0.3)
Average 75.5% 9.0% 4.5% (-1.2) 0.2% (-1.1)
High 95.6% 16.7% 2.7% (-0.9) 0.2% (-1.2)
having high variance in their meal preparation times. In three nex experiments, we change
the meal preparation process for the same three restaurants as in the previous experiment.
One restaurant at a time, we assume preparation times to be given by LN (µ = 7.41, σ = 1.6).
The modified distribution has the same mean as the previous distribution of meal preparation times but a higher standard deviation. The relative increase in MSE and relative
and absolute decrease in orders per day for the restaurant and all restaurants for all three
instances is shown in Tab. 6. We observe a strong increase in MSE for estimated arrival
times of high-variance restaurants. The higher the workload of the restaurant the higher
the increase in MSE. This might be explained by the location of the restaurants and our
Lemma 1. Restaurants with higher workloads are typically located in the center of the city.
Therefore, the trips of drivers to the restaurants might be shorter on average. This increases
the probability that wait times of drivers at the restaurant are affected by long food preparation times. In contrast, shorter food preparation times are still dominated by the time
required to drive to the restaurant. Low-workload restaurants are typically located in the
outskirts of the city. Trips to these restaurants might take longer on average and compensate
for long meal preparation times. A decrease in reliability also comes with a decrease of orders
for the restaurant and the platform. In particular, the already unpopular restaurant loses
a significant portion of its customers. In contrast, the most popular restaurant loses only a
small portion of its customers. We explain this observation as follows: If the workload of
a unpopular restaurant in the outskirts of the city further decreases the chance of a vehicle
being close to the restaurant also decreases. As a consequence, we can serve even fewer
customer requests for this restaurant in a reasonable time. When we look at the decrease in
orders for the platform, the trend is reversed: When a highly popular restaurant is unreliable,
47
the platform loses the most customers. In contrast, when an unpopular restaurant becomes
unreliable, the platform loses only a few customers. This might be due to an increase in
fleet flexibility when fewer vehicles drive to the low workload restaurant in the outskirts in
the city. Therefore, we are able to better serve more densely populated areas in the city
and are able to compensate for the customer loss at the low workload restaurant. However,
the overall decrease in orders for the restaurant-meal-delivery platform is negligible. If a
restaurant is unreliable customers just pick more reliable restaurants to order from. The
increase in MSE, on the other hand, is likely to have longer-term effects on the restaurant’s
popularity and on the platform’s performance.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have presented solution methods to estimate arrival times for the restaurant meal delivery problem. Estimated arrival times influence customers in their restaurant
choice, which, in turn, shapes future states of the restaurant meal delivery problem. We account for the interdependency of both problems by modeling them in a new unified Markov
decision process. Estimating arrival times for restaurant meal deliveries is uniquely challenging due to the interlinked uncertainty in delivery process and meal preparation process, as
well as the uncertainty in bundling of future demand.
To surmount these challenges, we have proposed an offline and an online-offline method.
The offline method relies on gradient boosted decision trees that map a set of handcrafted
features to estimated arrival times. The online-offline method exploits an offline approximation of the runtime-expensive routing policy that is learned supervised by a deep neural
network to conduct online simulations of all processes, including future demand and routing
decisions, in real time. We have tested our methods for restaurant meal delivery in Iowa
City. Our results demonstrate that anticipation of the problem’s dynamism and uncertainty
is crucial to predict arrival times accurately. Our proposed methods efficiently incorporate
the problem’s dynamism and uncertainty, likely enabling them to perform close to a strong
theoretical lower bound, while requiring minimal runtime.
Restaurant meal delivery platforms face the unique challenges of fast-paced last-mile
48
delivery with a constant need for optimization due to fierce competition in a rapidly growing
market. This presents the restaurant meal delivery problem as a diverse and rich area of
research in transportation and logistics. In the following, we discuss promising research
avenues in this domain.
In our managerial analysis, we have shown that spatial factors, customer patience and
flexibility, and advertisement strongly influence the dynamics of the problem. Building on
the observed effect of restaurant advertisement, future research could extend the proposed
model by considering dynamic pricing or advertising in order to deliberately increase the
likelihood of logistically favorable future states. In this context, a closer look towards more
detailed customer choice models may be very valuable. Since we have tested our method
on a variety of different customer preference settings, we are confident that our method will
likely perform well also in these cases. We also have shown the importance of restaurant and
customer locations. Recently, restaurant meal delivery services started to open up kitchens
that solely serve delivery requests. This initiates a new location planning problem, possibly
even integrated in the presented problem, that has yet to be addressed in the literature.
Furthermore, the heterogeneous service level raises fairness questions. Future work may
analyze how fair service can be offered in an efficient way.
Methodologically, we have shown that routing decisions can be approximated with the
help of a deep neural network to drastically accelerate online simulations of the delivery process. This online-offline approach is not limited to estimating arrival times, but constitutes
a promising tool to accelerate all simulations that require routing decisions. Future work
could exploit the online-offline framework to derive simulation-based anticipatory routing
decisions for dynamic pickup and delivery problems, for example, in the field of passenger
transportation, or urban same-day delivery.
Acknowledgement
This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) - 413322447. We gratefully acknowledge their support. Furthermore, the authors acknowledge the North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN) for providing HPC
49
resources that have contributed to the research results reported in this paper.
References
Bello, Irwan, Pham, Hieu, Le, Quoc V, Norouzi, Mohammad, and Bengio, Samy. 2016. “Neural combinatorial optimization with reinforcement learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09940.
Berbeglia, Gerardo, Cordeau, Jean-Fran¸cois, and Laporte, Gilbert. 2010. “Dynamic pickup
and delivery problems.” European Journal of Operational Research 202 (1): 8–15.
Bertsimas, Dimitris, Delarue, Arthur, Jaillet, Patrick, and Martin, S´ebastien. 2019. “Travel
time estimation in the age of big data.” Operations Research 67 (2): 498–515.
Bissacco, Alessandro, Yang, Ming-Hsuan, and Soatto, Stefano. 2007. “Fast human pose estimation using appearance and motion via multi-dimensional boosting regression.” In
2007 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1–8. IEEE.
Chen, Mei, Liu, Xiaobo, Xia, Jingxin, and Chien, Steven. 2004. “A dynamic bus-arrival
time prediction model based on APC data.” Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure
Engineering 19 (5): 364–376.
Chen, Xinwei, Wang, Tong, Thomas, Barrett W, and Ulmer, Marlin W. 2020. “Same-Day
Delivery with Fairness.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09541.
Chu, Lianyu, Oh, S, and Recker, Will. 2005. “Adaptive Kalman filter based freeway travel
time estimation.” In 84th TRB Annual Meeting, Washington DC.
Dai, Hongyan and Liu, Peng. 2019. “Workforce planning for O2O delivery systems with
crowdsourced drivers.” Annals of Operations Research: 1–27.
Davis, Mark M and Heineke, Janelle. 1998. “How disconfirmation, perception and actual
waiting times impact customer satisfaction.” International Journal of Service Industry
Management.
50
Deudon, Michel, Cournut, Pierre, Lacoste, Alexandre, Adulyasak, Yossiri, and Rousseau,
Louis-Martin. 2018. “Learning heuristics for the TSP by policy gradient.” In International Conference on the Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence,
and Operations Research, 170–181. Springer.
Du, Mengnan, Liu, Ninghao, and Hu, Xia. 2019. “Techniques for interpretable machine
learning.” Communications of the ACM 63 (1): 68–77.
Florio, Alexandre M., Kinable, Joris, and Van Woensel, Tom. 2020. “Learning Time-Dependent
Travel Speeds from Big Data.” Submitted.
Friedman, Jerome H. 2001. “Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine.”
Annals of Statistics: 1189–1232.
Glaeser, Chloe K., Oh, J., and Sue, X. 2020. “Online Food Ordering Platforms: Commission
Rates and Delivery Fees.” Submitted.
Hoogeboom, Maaike, Adulyasak, Yossiri, Dullaert, Wout, and Jaillet, Patrick. 2020. “The
Robust Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Window Assignments.” To appear in Transportation Science.
Howland, Daphne. 2016. Amazon pledges same-day delivery to all urban neighborhoods after
outcry. https://www.retaildive.com/news/amazon-pledges-same-day-deliveryto - all - urban - neighborhoods - after - outcry / 418843/. Online; accessed 27 July
2020.
Huang, He, Pouls, Martin, Meyer, Anne, and Pauly, Markus. 2020. “Travel Time Prediction
using Tree-Based Ensembles.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13818.
Hutchinson, Rebecca A, Liu, Li-Ping, and Dietterich, Thomas G. 2011. “Incorporating
boosted regression trees into ecological latent variable models.” In Twenty-fifth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Ke, Guolin, Meng, Qi, Finley, Thomas, Wang, Taifeng, Chen, Wei, Ma, Weidong, Ye, Qiwei,
and Liu, Tie-Yan. 2017. “Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree.”
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 3146–3154.
51
Kim, G. 2017. “Travel time estimation in vehicle routing problem.” In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management (IEEM),
1004–1008. IEEE.
Kingma, Diederik P and Ba, Jimmy. 2014. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Lee, Wei-Hsun, Tseng, Shian-Shyong, and Tsai, Sheng-Han. 2009. “A knowledge based realtime travel time prediction system for urban network.” Expert systems with Applications
36 (3): 4239–4247.
Lee, Ying. 2009. “Freeway travel time forecast using artifical neural networks with cluster
method.” In 2009 12th International Conference on Information Fusion, 1331–1338.
IEEE.
Li, Xiangyong, Tian, Peng, and Leung, Stephen CH. 2010. “Vehicle routing problems with
time windows and stochastic travel and service times: Models and algorithm.” International Journal of Production Economics 125 (1): 137–145.
Lingitz, Lukas, Gallina, Viola, Ansari, Fazel, Gyulai, D´avid, Pfeiffer, Andr´as, Sihn, Wilfried,
and Monostori, L´aszl´o. 2018. “Lead time prediction using machine learning algorithms:
A case study by a semiconductor manufacturer.” Procedia CIRP 72:1051–1056.
Liu, Sheng, He, Long, and Shen, Zuo-Jun Max. 2018. “On-time last mile delivery: Order
assignment with travel time predictors.” Forthcoming in Management Science.
Loshchilov, Ilya and Hutter, Frank. 2016. “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm
restarts.” arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.03983.
Ma´ndziuk, Jacek. 2018. “New shades of the vehicle routing problem: emerging problem
formulations and computational intelligence solution methods.” IEEE Transactions on
Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence 3 (3): 230–244.
Miki, Shoma, Yamamoto, Daisuke, and Ebara, Hiroyuki. 2018. “Applying deep learning and
reinforcement learning to traveling salesman problem.” In 2018 International Conference
on Computing, Electronics & Communications Engineering (iCCECE), 65–70. IEEE.
52
Molnar, Christoph. 2019. Interpretable Machine Learning: A Guide for Making Black Box
Models Explainable. https://christophm.github.io/interpretable-ml-book/.
Pittman, Simon J and Brown, Kerry A. 2011. “Multi-scale approach for predicting fish
species distributions across coral reef seascapes.” PLOS ONE 6 (5).
Polato, Mirko, Sperduti, Alessandro, Burattin, Andrea, and Leoni, Massimiliano de. 2014.
“Data-aware remaining time prediction of business process instances.” In 2014 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 816–823. IEEE.
Poschmann, Peter, Weinke, Manuel, Balster, Andreas, Straube, Frank, Friedrich, Hanno,
and Ludwig, Andr´e. 2019. “Realization of ETA Predictions for Intermodal Logistics
Networks Using Artificial Intelligence.” In Interdisciplinary Conference on Production,
Logistics and Traffic, 155–176. Springer.
Powell, Warren B. 2011. Approximate Dynamic Programming: Solving the curses of dimensionality. Vol. 703. John Wiley & Sons.
Prokhorchuk, Anatolii, Dauwels, Justin, and Jaillet, Patrick. 2019. “Estimating Travel Time
Distributions by Bayesian Network Inference.” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 21 (5): 1867–1876.
Reimann, Martin, L¨unemann, Ulrich F, and Chase, Richard B. 2008. “Uncertainty avoidance as a moderator of the relationship between perceived service quality and customer
satisfaction.” Journal of Service Research 11 (1): 63–73.
Reyes, Damian, Erera, Alan, Savelsbergh, Martin, Sahasrabudhe, Sagar, and O’Neil, Ryan.
2018. “The meal delivery routing problem.” Optimization Online.
Smith, Leslie N. 2017. “Cyclical learning rates for training neural networks.” In 2017 IEEE
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 464–472. IEEE.
Statista Survey. 2020. eServices Report 2020 - Online Food Delivery. https://www.statis
ta.com/study/40457/food-delivery/.
53
Thompson, David A, Yarnold, Paul R, Williams, Diana R, and Adams, Stephen L. 1996.
“Effects of actual waiting time, perceived waiting time, information delivery, and expressive quality on patient satisfaction in the emergency department.” Annals of Emergency
Medicine 28 (6): 657–665.
Ulmer, Marlin. 2020. “Dynamic pricing and routing for same-day delivery.” Transportation
Science 54 (4): 1016–1033.
Ulmer, Marlin W, Goodson, Justin C, Mattfeld, Dirk C, and Hennig, Marco. 2019. “Offline–
online approximate dynamic programming for dynamic vehicle routing with stochastic
requests.” Transportation Science 53 (1): 185–202.
Ulmer, Marlin and Savelsbergh, Martin. 2020. “Workforce Scheduling in the Era of Crowdsourced Delivery.” Transportation Science 54 (4): 1113–1133.
Ulmer, Marlin and Thomas, Barrett W. 2019. “Enough Waiting for the Cable Guy—Estimating
Arrival Times for Service Vehicle Routing.” Transportation Science 53 (3): 897–916.
Ulmer, Marlin, Thomas, Barrett W, Campbell, Ann Melissa, and Woyak, Nicholas. 2020.
“The restaurant meal delivery problem: Dynamic pick-up and delivery with deadlines
and random ready times.” To appear in Transportation Science.
Van Lint, JWC, Hoogendoorn, SP, and Zuylen, Henk J van. 2005. “Accurate freeway travel
time prediction with state-space neural networks under missing data.” Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 13 (5-6): 347–369.
Vareias, Anastasios D, Repoussis, Panagiotis P, and Tarantilis, Christos D. 2019. “Assessing customer service reliability in route planning with self-imposed time windows and
stochastic travel times.” Transportation Science 53 (1): 256–281.
Wang, Dehua, Zhang, Yang, and Zhao, Yi. 2017. “LightGBM: an effective miRNA classification method in breast cancer patients.” In Proceedings of the 2017 International
Conference on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, 7–11.
54
Wu, Fan and Wu, Lixia. 2019. “DeepETA: A Spatial-Temporal Sequential Neural Network
Model for Estimating Time of Arrival in Package Delivery System.” In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 33:774–781.
Yildiz, Baris and Savelsbergh, Martin. 2019. “Provably high-quality solutions for the meal
delivery routing problem.” Transportation Science 53 (5): 1372–1388.
Zhang, Junlong, Lam, William HK, and Chen, Bi Yu. 2013. “A stochastic vehicle routing
problem with travel time uncertainty: trade-off between cost and customer service.”
Networks and Spatial Economics 13 (4): 471–496.
Zhu, Lin, Yu, Wei, Zhou, Kairong, Wang, Xing, Feng, Wenxing, Wang, Pengyu, Chen, Ning,
and Lee, Pei. 2020. “Order Fulfillment Cycle Time Estimation for On-Demand Food Delivery.” In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2571–2580.
55
A Appendix
In Appendix A.1, we analyze the role of bundling in RMDPEAT. In Appendix A.2, we
compare different learning rate strategies to train our DNN (see Section 4.3 and Section 5.2).
In Appendix A.3, we employ our offline method as EAT policy. In Appendix A.4, we
provide a Table with detailed results on the approximation quality of our methods and a
graphical comparison of the runtime distribution of online and online-offline simulations (see
Section 5.3).
A.1 No Bundling
In our work, we claimed that bundling is a major source of delay. We further claimed that
bundling is necessary to assert efficiency of our fleet. In the following, we conduct two
experiments on a standard instance of 1920 days. In the first experiment, we use PoM as
EAT policy and in the second experiment, we use our offline method as EAT policy. We use
a first-in-first-out routing policy to avoid bundling entirely. We observe an MSE of 5.36 when
using PoM and an MSE of 4.57 when using our offline method. Both MSEs are significantly
lower than when we allow bundling (see Section 5.3). This indicates that bundling is a
major cause of delay that is hard to predict. However, when disallowing bundling, we see a
rejection rate of 13.9% for PoM and a rejection rate of 14.0% for our offline method. This is a
considerable loss in customers compared to a rejection rate of 1.9% when allowing bundling.
We conclude that bundling makes it difficult to predict arrival times but is necessary to serve
customers efficiently.
A.2 Comparison of Learning Rate Strategies
When training our DNN, we considered three different learning rate strategies. We test a
constant learning rate, a cyclic super-convergence learning rate strategy as given by Smith
(2017), and a cosine annealing learning rate strategy as discussed in Section 4.3. Fig. 13
shows the result of our experiments. The left figure describes the learning rate (y-axis)
for each batch iteration (x-axis). The right figure describes the cross-entropy loss (y-axis)
over 150 epochs (x-axis) for our DNN for each learning rate strategy. We observe that
56
0 100000 200000 300000 400000
Iteration
0
1
2
3
4
5
Learning rate
1e 3
Cyclic LR
Cosinus annealing LR
Constant LR
0 25 50 75 100 125 150
Epoch
3.30
3.35
3.40
3.45
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Sum of Cross-Entropies
Validation loss (const. LR)
Validation loss (cos. annealing LR)
Validation loss (cyclic LR)
Figure 13 Learning Rate Strategies (left) and Cross-Entropy Loss for Different Learning Rate Strategies (right)
the cosine annealing learning rate strategy and the cyclic super-convergence learning rate
strategy outperform the constant learning rate strategy. The DNN using a cosine annealing
learning rate strategy has a lower cross-entropy loss than the DNN using a cyclic superconvergence learning rate strategy when trained for 150 epochs. For this reason, we decided
to train our DNN with the cosine annealing learning rate strategy.
A.3 Robustness of our Offline Method
In the previous section, we only communicated arrival times derived by PoM. Our offline
method did not interfere with the RMDPEAT process. Communicating different arrival times
changes the data and therefore might reduce accuracy of our policy. In the following, we
employ the offline method as EAT policy on our standard instance. We observe a significant
increase in prediction quality, a negligible decrease in overall orders, and a noticeable decrease
in mean wait time when employing the offline method:
1. The MSE decreases from 57.74 for PoM to 31.05 for our offline method. The loss in
accuracy when applying the offline method as EAT policy in contrast to just predicting
with it without communicating the arrival times to customer is negligible. The offline
method still significantly outperforms PoM in terms of accuracy.
2. We observe a decrease of 0.5% in orders. We proved that PoM underestimates arrival
57
times in Lemma 1 and confirmed the Lemma and the negligible bias of our offline
method empirically in Section 5.3. Therefore, the cause of the slight decrease in orders
might be higher arrival time estimations communicated by our offline method compared
to the arrival times communicated by PoM.
3. When employing the offline method the average wait time of customers decreases from
45.12 minutes to 42.08 minutes. This indicates that a higher accuracy in arrival time
estimation might lead to lower average wait times for customers. An explanation could
be that an anticipatory EAT policy induces a logistically more favorable distribution
of orders.
A.4 Approximation Quality
We show the detailed experimental results on the test instances of Section 5 in Tab. 7. We
performed up to 128 online-offline simulations, but only up to 32 online simulations. A
higher number of online simulations were not possible due to their heavy computational
burden. The runtime of online and online-offline simulations are illustrated in Fig. 14. The
x-axis denotes the runtime required in seconds of each simulation. The y-axis denotes the
relative frequency of each runtime. The distribution is estimated by a Gaussian kernel
density estimator. We observe that the mean and variance of our online-offline simulation’s
runtime distribution are by an order of magnitude smaller than the mean and variance of
the online simulation’s runtime distribution.
58
Table 7 Quality of Arrival Time Estimations
Method MSE MAE ME Time (in s/cust.)
Offline Methods
Planning on means 57.46 4.83 4.16 0.00
GBDT 26.67 3.70 -0.07 0.00
Combination of Offline and Online Methods
n=
Approx. simul. 1 32.42 3.57 0.78 0.21
2 25.89 3.24 0.79
4 22.79 3.05 0.78
8 21.31 2.94 0.78
16 20.47 2.88 0.80
32 20.05 2.84 0.79
64 19.83 2.83 0.79
128 19.77 2.83 0.79
Online Methods
n=
Exact simul. 1 35.70 3.67 -0.23 6.71
2 28.76 3.32 -0.24
4 24.18 3.09 -0.24
8 21.42 2.93 -0.24
16 20.42 2.87 -0.23
32 19.81 2.81 -0.18
59
Figure 14 Comparison of Mean Runtime of Online and Online-Offline Simulations
(n=1)
60