TRANSPORT FINDINGS
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R5
in R
Rafael H. M. Pereira
1
, Marcus Saraiva
1
, Daniel Herszenhut 1
, Carlos Kaue Vieira Braga
1
, Matthew Wigginton Conway
2
1
Ipea - Institute for Applied Economic Research, 2 School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning, Arizona State University
Keywords: travel impedance, accessibility, travel time, transport networks, routing, software
https://doi.org/10.32866/001c.21262
Findings
Routing is a key step in transport planning and research. Nonetheless, researchers
and practitioners often face challenges when performing this task due to long
computation times and the cost of licensed software. R5
is a multimodal
transport network router that offers multiple routing features, such as calculating
travel times over a time window and returning multiple itineraries for origin/
destination pairs. This paper describes r5r, an open-source R package that
leverages R5
to efficiently compute travel time matrices and generate detailed
itineraries between sets of origins and destinations at no expense using seamless
parallel computing.
Questions
Transport routing is the process of finding the fastest or lowest-cost routes
that connect places in a given transport network, and is a key step in transport
accessibility analysis, fleet allocation and transport simulation and planning
more broadly (Levinson et al. 2020). However, researchers and practitioners
often face practical challenges when carrying out routing tasks due to the costs
of licensed software, limited data availability, and the long computation times
required to run multiple routing scenarios, particularly in large and complex
multimodal transport networks.
While there are several open-source routing packages available for R, they
either do not support public transport networks (Padgham 2019), or primarily
focus on providing point-to-point routes rather than origin-destination travel
time matrices (Morgan et al. 2019; Lovelace and Ellison 2019). Most routing
algorithms find paths to all points in the network while finding a single route.
Storing these paths rather than computing them for one origin-destination
pair at a time is orders of magnitude more efficient. To our knowledge, no R
package exists that supports these efficient many-to-many queries for public
transport networks.
To fill this gap, this paper presents r5r, a new open-source R package for
routing on multimodal transport networks based on the Rapid Realistic
Routing on Real-world and Reimagined networks (R5
) package. R5
is an open
access routing engine written in Java and developed at Conveyal (Conway,
Byrd, and van der Linden 2017; Conway, Byrd, and van Eggermond 2018)
to provide an efficient backend for analytic applications, such as accessibility
analysis. The r5r package provides an interface to run R5
locally from within
Pereira, Rafael H. M., Marcus Saraiva, Daniel Herszenhut, Carlos Kaue Vieira Braga, and
Matthew Wigginton Conway. 2021. “R5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal
Transport Networks with R5 in R.” Findings, March.
https://doi.org/10.32866/001c.21262.
R using seamless parallel computing. This tool can be used to address a variety
of questions that require the efficient calculation of travel time matrices or the
examination of multimodal transport routes.
Methods
The r5r package has low data requirements and is easily scalable, allowing fast
computation of routes and travel times for either city or region-level analysis.
It creates a routable transport network using street network data from
OpenStreetMap (OSM) and optionally public transport data in the General
Transit Feed Specification (GTFS) format.
The r5r package has 3 fundamental functions:
Both routing functions are versatile so users can easily set customized inputs
such as transport modes, departure dates and times, walking and cycling
speeds, maximum trip duration, walking distances and number of public
transport transfers. In the following section, we will focus on results obtained
from travel_time_matrix().
Findings
After it is installed with the install.packages("r5r") command, the package can be
attached (alongside other packages to reproduce this article), as in Code 1.
• setup_r5(): builds a multimodal transport network used for routing in
R5
. This function automatically (1) downloads/updates a compiled
R5
JAR file and stores it locally for future use; and (2) combines the
OSM and GTFS datasets to build a routable network object.
• travel_time_matrix(): computes travel time estimates between one or
multiple origin/destination pairs for a single departure time or for
multiple departure times over a time_window set by the user. This
function uses an R5
-specific extension to the RAPTOR routing
algorithm which provides an efficient and systematic sampling of
multiple simulated schedules when using frequency-based GTFS data
(Conway, Byrd, and van der Linden 2017).
• detailed_itineraries(): computes detailed information on routes between
one or multiple origin/destination pairs for a single departure time.
The output includes detailed information on route alternatives such
as the transport mode, waiting time, travel time and distance of each
segment of the trip. This function uses an R5
-specific extension1
to
the McRAPTOR (Delling, Pajor, and Werneck 2015) routing
algorithm to find both optimal and slightly suboptimal paths.
1 The specific extension to McRAPTOR to do suboptimal path routing is not documented yet.
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 2
Code 1: Load required libraries
Code 2: Set up routable transport network
For this article, we used r5r version v0.3-2 and R5
version v6.0.1.
The package includes sample datasets for the cities of São Paulo and Porto
Alegre (both in Brazil). Each dataset includes:
Building a routable transport network
To build a routable transport network with r5r and load it into memory, the
user needs to call setup_r5 with the path to the directory where OSM and GTFS
data are stored. In the examples herein, we use the provided Porto Alegre
dataset (Code 2).
The function uses the .pbf and the GTFS.zip files in the directory pointed by
data_path to create a multimodal transport network used for routing by R5
. If
multiple GTFS files are present, R5 will merge them into a single transport
network. The resulting network.dat as well as some other files used by R5
are saved
inside the supplied directory for later reuse.
• An OSM network in .pbf format.
• A public transport network in GTFS.zip format.
• The spatial coordinates of points covering the area in .csv format,
including information on the size of resident population and the
number of schools in each location.
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 3
Calculating a travel time matrix
The travel_time_matrix() function takes, as inputs, the spatial location of origins/
destinations (either as a spatial sf POINT object, or as a data.frame containing the
columns id, lon and lat) and a few travel parameters such as maximum trip
duration, or walking distance. It outputs travel time estimates for each origindestination pair at a set departure_datetime.
Since service levels can significantly vary across the day (Stępniak et al. 2019),
r5r provides a time_window parameter that can help address the aggregation
component of the modifiable temporal unit problem (MTUP) (Pereira 2019).
When this parameter is set, R5 will compute travel times for trips at the
specified departure time and every minute for time_window minutes after. The
percentiles parameter allows the user to retrieve travel time estimates at different
points of the distribution (by default the median). These percentiles reflect
service variation over the time window, but do not reflect schedule deviation
not represented in the GTFS, though tools exist to create GTFS which reflects
schedule deviations (Wessel, Allen, and Farber 2017).
An example of the function’s usage is presented in Code 3. Computing this
1227x1227 travel time matrix with a 120-minute time window takes less than a
minute on a Windows machine with a 1.9GHz Intel i7 and 16GB RAM.
visualizing travel-time uncertainty
Figure 1 shows how the travel times to arrive at the central bus station from
several origin points vary within the time window (5th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and
95th percentiles), reflecting that travel times are more uncertain when leaving
from some places than others. While there is little to no uncertainty when
departing from places that are very close (walking distance) to the central bus
station, travel times from places farther away are more affected by departure
time variations and service frequency levels.
visualizing isochrones
In our example, we can visualize the isochrone (area reachable within a certain
amount of time) departing from the central bus station in Figure 2.
creating accessibility metrics
Accessibility metrics measure the opportunities, such as jobs, a traveler could
reach from a particular location (Levinson et al. 2020). One of the simplest
forms is a cumulative-opportunities metric, which sums all of the
opportunities accessible from each location in less than a cutoff time. Using the
travel time matrix and information on the number of opportunities available at
each location, we can calculate and map accessibility. In Figure 3 we compute
the number of schools accessible by public transport in less than 20 minutes.
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 4
Code 3: Compute travel time matrix
Acknowledgments
The R5
routing engine is developed at Conveyal with contributions from
several developers. This work was supported by the Brazilian Institute for
Applied Economic Research (Ipea).
Submitted: January 27, 2021 AEDT, Accepted: February 25, 2021 AEDT
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 5
Code: Figure 1
Figure 1: Travel time uncertainty by trip origin
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 6
Code: Figure 2
Figure 2: Isochrones by public transport departing from the central bus station
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 7
Code: Figure 3
Figure 3: Number of schools accessible by public transport in less than 20 minutes
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-SA-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-sa/4.0 and legal code at https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode for more
information.
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 8
references
Conway, Matthew Wigginton, Andrew Byrd, and Michael van Eggermond. 2018. “Accounting for
Uncertainty and Variation in Accessibility Metrics for Public Transport Sketch Planning.” Journal
of Transport and Land Use 11 (1). https://doi.org/10.5198/jtlu.2018.1074.
Conway, Matthew Wigginton, Andrew Byrd, and Marco van der Linden. 2017. “Evidence-Based
Transit and Land Use Sketch Planning Using Interactive Accessibility Methods on Combined
Schedule and Headway-Based Networks.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board 2653 (1): 45–53. https://doi.org/10.3141/2653-06.
Delling, Daniel, Thomas Pajor, and Renato F. Werneck. 2015. “Round-Based Public Transit
Routing.” Transportation Science 49 (3): 591–604. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2014.0534.
Levinson, David et al. 2020. “Transport Access Manual: A Guide for Measuring Connection
Between People and Places.” https://ses.library.usyd.edu.au/handle/2123/23733.
Lovelace, Robin, and Richard Ellison. 2019. “Stplanr: A Package for Transport Planning.” The R
Journal 10 (2): 7. https://doi.org/10.32614/rj-2018-053.
Morgan, Malcolm, Marcus Young, Robin Lovelace, and Layik Hama. 2019. “OpenTripPlanner for
R.” Journal of Open Source Software 4 (44): 1926. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01926.
Padgham, Mark. 2019. “Dodgr: An R Package for Network Flow Aggregation.” Transport
Findings, January. https://doi.org/10.32866/6945.
Pereira, Rafael H.M. 2019. “Future Accessibility Impacts of Transport Policy Scenarios: Equity and
Sensitivity to Travel Time Thresholds for Bus Rapid Transit Expansion in Rio de Janeiro.” Journal
of Transport Geography 74 (January): 321–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2018.12.005.
Stępniak, Marcin, John P. Pritchard, Karst T. Geurs, and Sławomir Goliszek. 2019. “The Impact of
Temporal Resolution on Public Transport Accessibility Measurement: Review and Case Study in
Poland.” Journal of Transport Geography 75 (February): 8–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jtrangeo.2019.01.007.
Wessel, Nate, Jeff Allen, and Steven Farber. 2017. “Constructing a Routable Retrospective Transit
Timetable from a Real-Time Vehicle Location Feed and GTFS.” Journal of Transport Geography 62
(June): 92–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2017.04.012.
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 9
supplementary materials
Code to reproduce paper
Download: https://findingspress.org/article/21262-r5r-rapid-realistic-routing-on-multimodal-transportnetworks-with-r-5-in-r/attachment/54700.zip
r5r: Rapid Realistic Routing on Multimodal Transport Networks with R^5^ in R
Findings 10