The Meal Delivery Routing Problem
Damian Reyes1
, Alan Erera1
, Martin Savelsbergh1
,
Sagar Sahasrabudhe2
, and Ryan O’Neil2
1H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332-0205
2Decision Engineering Department, Grubhub, Chicago, IL 60602
March 1, 2018
Abstract
We introduce the Meal Delivery Routing Problem (MDRP) to formalize and study an important
emerging class of dynamic delivery operations. We develop optimization-based algorithms tailored
to solve the courier assignment (dynamic vehicle routing) and capacity management (offline shift
scheduling) problems encountered in meal delivery operations. Extensive computational experiments using instances with realistic size, geography, urgency and dynamism demonstrate that our
algorithmic ideas provide solid foundations for real-world implementations.
1 Introduction
Online restaurant aggregators – on-demand meal-ordering platforms where diners order their favorite
cravings from an array of restaurants – are growing at a fast pace [5], and with them, the volume of
meal delivery operations is rising quickly worldwide [10], increasing the potential for new economies of
scope, scale, and density. According to Morgan Stanley, “online food delivery could grow by 16% annual
compound rate in [the] next 5 years”[17]. Aiming to capitalize on the market opportunity, emerging
providers are investing heavily [8] in the deployment of meal delivery networks that promise restaurants
and diners a reliable, fast and cost-effective delivery process.
While in the short-term the transition from restaurant-owned delivery services (which for many
restaurants means no deliveries at all) to integrated meal delivery networks can focus on reliability and
speed, the long-term sustainability of these networks is contingent on turning the efficiency potential
into actual profits. For this purpose, appropriate optimization technologies must be developed to solve
increasingly large dynamic pickup and delivery problems in near-real time, and prescribe high-quality
decisions able to control costs while satisfying very high service standards.
The successful deployment and operation of meal delivery networks is difficult not only due to the
scale of these systems, but also due to the dynamism and urgency of arriving orders [26]. Without
exaggeration, meal delivery is the ultimate challenge in last mile logistics: a typical order is expected to
be delivered within an hour (much less if possible), and within minutes of the food becoming ready, thus
reducing consolidation opportunities and imposing the need for more vehicles operating simultaneously
and executing shorter routes. Furthermore, meal delivery networks must be able to respond to wide,
and often abrupt, swings in demand both in spatial and time dimensions.
In an attempt to achieve the desired responsiveness without the costs linked to employing a sufficiently large permanent fleet of vehicles (and full-time drivers), meal delivery providers have adopted
1
“digital marketplace” business models – where the supply of couriers, i.e., independent contractors
making deliveries [21], is managed indirectly through economic incentives. This strategy, first explored
in the context of taxi and ride-hailing services, externalizes fixed costs (to couriers) and enhances the
ability of the system to plan and control capacity levels over time and geography in sync with demand
fluctuations.
However, it is worth emphasizing how full reliance on independent-contractors establishes a fundamentally different operating environment than that of traditional vehicle routing applications. In
exchange for internalizing some of the risks and costs associated with demand uncertainty, couriers
are entitled to a significant degree of autonomy, thereby adding yet another layer of complexity in the
design of appropriate optimization technology: company drivers will implement instructions from central planning, whereas independent contractors might do so, thus introducing uncertainty in scheduling
(couriers have some freedom to choose the hours they work), dispatching (couriers can reject an offered
assignment), and routing (couriers can disregard the suggested sequence of deliveries).
In synthesis, meal delivery networks have ushered in dynamic pickup and delivery problems of unprecedented scale, and meal delivery providers are spearheading the adoption of flexible business models,
like crowd-sourced delivery [23], in the last-mile goods-transportation sector. In this study, we are concerned with laying out solid foundations for the design of optimization technologies that can scale up to
the challenge. We have adopted a dynamic deterministic framework, even if this means that novel and
interesting questions (in particular, those related to courier autonomy) are not (yet) explored.
The main contributions of this paper are: i) a definition of the Meal Delivery Routing Problem
(MDRP) to model the essential structure of this emerging class of dynamic delivery systems; ii) a
solution algorithm based on a rolling-horizon repeated matching approach, designed to solve large-scale
instances of the MDRP; iii) an off-line decision support tool to determine a high-quality schedule of
courier shifts (which has been used in the instance generation process) iv) the release to the public
domain of a set of instances built from real-life historic data to facilitate benchmarking of alternative
solution methodologies; v) an extensive computational study demonstrating, among others, that (a) our
approach achieves high-quality solutions with respect to multiple service objectives, over a wide spectrum
of instance characteristics, despite its simplicity and myopism; (b) capacity scheduling decisions have a
critical impact on reliability and performance; (c) meal preparation time uncertainty has a minor impact
on reliability and performance..
We close this section with a brief survey of related literature, contextualizing some of the themes
of later sections. In Section 2, we define the Meal Delivery Routing Problem, and then describe our
solution algorithm (together with some possible variations) in Section 3. Next, in Section 4 we present
and discuss the results of a computational study. Finally, in Section 5 we provide some concluding
remarks.
1.1 Related literature
The MDRP belongs to the large family of dynamic vehicle routing problems (dVRP), more specifically,
to the class of dynamic pickup and delivery problems (dPDP). A vast number of researchers have studied
these problems from different angles for decades, and excellent surveys have been produced by Pillac
et al. [18] and Psaraftis et al. [20], in the case of dVRP, and Berbeglia et al. [6], in the case of dPDP.
In the next paragraphs we will limit ourselves to mention some recent studies that share some features
with our work in terms of modeling or solution methodology.
Recent research in dPDP has focused mainly on the movement of people, e.g., dial-a-ride and ridesharing applications [1, 9], yet, despite the contextual difference, these problems share some important
similarities with the MDRP: the difficulties posed by the increasingly large size of fully-dynamic instances, and the high urgency and low flexibility of the tasks to be scheduled. A frequently proposed
strategy to deal with this challenge is the use of a myopic rolling horizon repeated matching approach, a
scalable framework that has been shown to produce high quality solutions (e.g., [24, 28]), making virtue
2
out of necessity thanks to the low visibility of future events and the tight time constraints present in
taxi and ride-sharing environments.
But perhaps the most natural label under which to catalogue the MDRP is that of dynamic delivery
problems, a type of dPDP that has just recently begun to be studied on its own right, as same-day
delivery services become more and more ubiquitous, in both simplified analytic systems (Archetti et al.
[2], Klapp et al. [11], Reyes et al. [22]) and more realistic settings (Azi et al. [4], Voccia et al. [27], Klapp
[12], Archetti et al. [3], Dayarian and Savelsbergh [7]). In dynamic delivery problems, vehicles make
multiple trips during the operating period to deliver goods locally from a depot (or a small number
of depots, i.e., restaurants, in the case of the MDRP) to customer locations. Due to the structure
of the network (one or few depots), and also due to tight time constraints being modeled, dynamic
delivery solutions have a special structure: once a vehicle is dispatched, modifying the route is highly
undesirable or impractical. This structure is usually enforced directly in the model formulation, by
requiring vehicles to be empty before starting additional pickup operations, which, while restrictive, is
not at all unreasonable when dealing with deliveries of perishable goods, like meals. Ongoing assessments
by Ulmer et al. [25] on the impact of relaxing this condition in the context of same day delivery suggest
that allowing more flexible routes (preemptive returns in the single-depot case) may increase the number
of customers served during the operating period, but the change on the average delivery times has not
been thoroughly explored (and a trade-off, i.e., an increase in delivery times, is plausible). Our proposed
MDRP model definition does not impose that restriction, as in a multi-depot problem it is conceivable
that routes may benefit from a vehicle making pickups while still executing deliveries from a different
depot. However, the solution algorithm presented in this paper always uses routes that finish all pending
deliveries before a new pickup.
Having contextualized the problem, let us introduce a few more works which have informed our
methods. The use of assignment models in rolling horizon strategies has a long history in the realm of
dynamic long-haul fleet management. Here we highlight the pivotal work by Yang et al. [29], where the
authors introduce a dynamic model that captures the essential characteristic of a real-time full truckload dispatching system, and compare a series of rolling horizon policies to assign (and schedule) jobs
to trucks, under different operating conditions. The value of advanced information is measured by comparing the performance of myopic assignment policies and a policy that uses some stochastic knowledge
about the expected location of future pickup and delivery points, and uses these expectations to account
for the cost of moving trucks to serve future uncertain requests in an otherwise myopic algorithm. Beyond the obvious difference in time scales, the full truckload assumption is a significant departure from
the meal delivery operating environment. However, we opt for defining route delivery segments (i.e.,
consolidation decisions) before solving the assignment problem, which effectively reinstates a similar
structure. While we do not use stochastic methods, we do explore the use of uncertain information
about the future through the assignment of “follow-on” pick-up and delivery chains, where the later
route segment will likely still change as more orders arrive, but already contains enough information to
anticipate needed vehicle movements.
An issue of central importance in the design of dynamic algorithms is how to most effectively balance between the fulfillment of current tasks and the preservation of flexibility to complete future and
unknown tasks. On this question, we highlight the work of Mitrovic-Minic et al. [16], who propose a
“double horizon” algorithm that evaluates the cost of actions (pickup or drop-off insertions, in this case)
using different cost functions if the actions occur in the short-term (within a given horizon) or in the
long-term (anything beyond the horizon), an approach motivated by applications where time windows
are wide and deliveries may occur much later than their corresponding pick-up operation (which is not
the case for on-demand meal delivery). The double horizon heuristic is shown to outperform traditional
(single) rolling-horizon algorithms, on instances with time windows ranging between 1 hour and 8 hours
from the release time, but with diminishing returns as the size of instances grows. Our solution algorithm incorporates a bi-objective mechanism with the same spirit, but operating in a different way (after
3
all, the time constraints in meal delivery are very tight,e.g., 40 minute target since announcement until
drop-off, unlike the problems for which “double-horizon” was conceived): we use information from an
interval possibly different to the “assignment horizon” (i.e., the window of orders to include in routes)
to determine how intensely should consolidation opportunities be prioritized. At or before busy periods,
like lunch and dinner time, when many orders arrive in a short time-span, the algorithm attempts to
create more efficient routes, even at the expense of individual order service quality, while in relatively
calm periods, the emphasis switches to delivering orders fast.
Another important question in dynamic routing is when to postpone and went to commit to the
execution of decisions in order to mitigate uncertainty. On this topic, the work by Mitrovic-Minic and
Laporte [15] comes to the fore. In [15], the distribution of waiting time for any given route is determined
through one of 4 “waiting strategies”: Drive First (DF: depart as early as possible), Wait First (WF:
depart as late as possible), Dynamic Wait (DF within service zones, WF between service zones), and
Advanced Dynamic Wait (DF within service zones, and slightly less “lazy” than WF between zones),
where “service zones” are essentially clusters of consecutive stops in a route determined dynamically. In
opposition to DF, WF tends to lead to more efficient routes, but at the risk of running out of vehicles to
complete all deliveries by their deadline; as expected, the more complex strategy dominates the rest. In
the context of meal delivery, service constraints are so restrictive that complex waiting strategies may
not have a critical impact: it makes little sense for a vehicle to wait idle after delivering an order if there
is more work to do, so the main question becomes how much to postpone departures from a restaurant.
Our strategy in this regard is described in detail in Section 3.3, and it can be interpreted as a restricted
form of WF at restaurants.
Finally, the concepts of dynamism and urgency are fundamental for the study of dynamic delivery
systems, where a large majority, if not the totality, of requests are revealed during the operating period
(dynamic requests), and must be completed within a short time window (urgent requests). Naturally, the
precise definition of these concepts has evolved throughout the years. Two decades ago, Lund et al. [14],
proposed to measure the degree of dynamism as the proportion of dynamic requests, a rough measure
primarily designed for situations where at least part of the requests are “advance requests”. To make
meaningful comparisons between scenarios with any proportion of dynamic requests, Larsen et al. [13]
later refined the definition and proposed the effective degree of dynamism, which attempted to capture
both urgency and evolution of information in a single measure. This definition is the most popular one
in recent literature. However, van Lon et al. [26] have recently argued that this popular measure has
significant flaws, and that dynamism and urgency should be measured separately to correct this. After
defining two independent measures, they empirically observe that dynamism, urgency and “cost” are
related in a non-linear way: low dynamism and high urgency lead to higher costs, but high dynamism
and high urgency do not; higher urgency leads to higher costs; and that cost is largely insensitive to
changes in dynamism, all else equal (except for high urgency scenarios, as previously noted). This
is consistent with the observations of Lund et al. [14], who noted that “even with a large number of
dynamic requests, it is possible to produce good solutions, provided that the dispatcher receives the
requests way ahead of the actual service time.” In this paper, we adopt the definitions of [26].
2 The meal delivery routing problem
In this section, we introduce a stylized model of meal delivery operations, with the goal of formalizing
what we consider to be their main structural features: multiple pick-up points (restaurants), dynamic
order arrivals, delivery capacity distributed throughout the day in the form of courier shifts, the possibility to pick up multiple orders simultaneously, among others. Being a first attempt to study such
systems, we have assumed a deterministic dynamic framework. Two important real-life features that
are not captures are the ability of couriers to turn down delivery assignment offers, and the ability of
couriers to relocate freely when idling. Having said this, let us introduce the model.
4
Let R be a set of restaurants, and let each restaurant r ∈ R have an associated location `r. Let O
be a set of orders, and let each order o ∈ O have an associated restaurant ro ∈ R, a placement time
ao, a ready time (i.e. a release date at the restaurant) eo, and an order drop-off location `o. Let C
be a set of couriers, where each courier c ∈ C has an on-time ec (when the courier goes on duty), an
on-location `c (where the courier will be at time ec), and an off-time lc > ec (when the courier goes
off duty). Assume that all information about R and C is known a priori, but information about any
particular order o ∈ O is revealed only at its placement time ao. The meal delivery routing problem
consists of determining feasible routes for couriers to complete the pick-up and delivery of orders, with
the objective to optimize a single or multiple performance measures. The structural assumptions that
determine feasibility, as well as relevant performance criteria are defined as follows.
2.1 Structural assumptions
Orders from the same restaurant may be combined into “bundles” with multiple drop-off locations,
where the ready time of a bundle is the latest ready time of the constituent orders. There is no limit to
the number of orders that may be combined into a bundle.
The travel time between any pair of locations is assumed to be invariant over time. The service time
associated with the pickup of an order at a restaurant, s
r
, represents the time a courier needs to park
his vehicle, walk to the restaurant, pick up one or more orders, and walk back to his vehicle. The value
of s
r
is invariant over time and independent of the number of orders being picked up. Similarly, s
o
,
represents the service time associated with delivering an order at a customer location, i.e., the time a
courier needs to park his vehicle, walk to the customer, drop off an order, and walk back to his vehicle.
The pickup time of an order (or bundle) at a restaurant is not smaller than the maximum of a) the
order ready time and b) the courier arrival time to the restaurant plus half of the service time at a
restaurant. The departure time from a restaurant is the pickup time plus half of the service time. The
drop-off time of an order is the arrival time of the courier at the customer location plus half of the
service time at a customer location. The departure time after delivering an order is the drop-off time
plus half of the service time.
Couriers cannot pick up any orders after their off-time, but are allowed to drop off orders after their
off-time. More importantly, in this deterministic model, it is assumed that couriers do not execute any
autonomous decisions while on duty. In particular, they always accept any instruction handed to them,
and they always wait for (new) instructions at their on-location and at the last location of their active
assignment. Furthermore, couriers cannot receive instructions while executing an assignment and, thus,
cannot be diverted while en-route to a restaurant.
Payments to couriers follow a guaranteed minimum compensation scheme: a courier earns p1 per
delivered order, or is compensated at the rate of p2 per hour, whichever is higher. Thus a courier collects
max{p1n, p2(lc − ec)}, where n is the total number of orders served by the courier.
We consider the following variations in the operating environment:
• Prepositioning. Without prepositioning, the only instruction that can be sent to a courier is to pick
up and deliver an order (possibly a bundled-order). With prepositioning, either the instruction to
move to a restaurant (a prepositioning move) or the instruction to pick up and deliver an order
can be sent to a courier.
• Assignment updates. Without assignment updates, once the instruction to pick up and deliver
an order (possibly a bundled-order) has been communicated to a courier, this assignment has to
be completed before a courier can receive a new instruction. With assignment updates, when a
courier arrives at a restaurant to pick up an order (possibly a bundled-order), an instruction can
be sent to the courier updating the order to be picked up. For example, the initial instruction
may have indicated that order o1 had to be picked up and delivered, and the update instruction
may indicate that order o1 and order o2 have to be picked up and delivered (a bundled-order).
5
Note that the only assignment update allowed is an update to the set of orders picked up at a
restaurant.
2.2 Performance metrics
Given that meal delivery providers must bring together diners, restaurants and couriers, each with their
own concerns, a number of performance measures are of interest. Some, like click-to-door, which is the
difference between the drop-off time of an order and the placement time of an order, involve a target
value, τ , and a maximum allowed value, τmax. The primary performance measures for the meal delivery
routing problem are:
1. Number of orders delivered.
2. Total courier compensation.
3. Cost per order: total courier compensation divided by number of orders delivered.
4. Fraction of couriers receiving guaranteed minimum compensation.
5. Click-to-door time: the difference between the drop-off time and the placement time of an order.
6. Click-to-door time overage: the difference between the drop-off time of an order and the placement
time of an order plus the target click-to-door time.
7. Ready-to-door time: the difference between the drop-off time of an order and the ready time of
an order.
8. Ready-to-pickup time: the difference between the pickup time of an order and its ready time.
9. Courier utilization: the fraction of the courier duty time that is devoted to driving, pickup service,
and drop-off service (as opposed to time spent waiting).
10. Courier delivery earnings: courier earnings when considering only the number of orders served.
11. Courier compensation: the maximum of the guaranteed minimum compensation (based on the
length of the duty period) and the delivery earnings.
12. Orders delivered per hour: for each courier, the number of orders delivered divided by the length
of the shift.
13. Bundles picked up per hour: for each courier, the number of order bundles assigned divided by
the length of the shift.
14. Orders per bundle: for each assignment, the number of orders to be picked up.
Relevant summary statistics for measures 5-13 are: average, standard deviation, minimum, 10-th percentile, median, 90-th percentile, and maximum.
3 A rolling horizon algorithm for the MDRP
In light of the highly dynamic and urgent nature of meal delivery operations, making a detailed delivery
plan for orders that will not be ready in the near future is unlikely to be of much advantage. For this
reason, we propose to solve the MDRP using a rolling horizon matching-based algorithm that every
f minutes solves a matching problem to prescribe only the next pick-up and delivery assignment for
each courier. Individual orders may be bundled to be picked-up together and then delivered by a single
courier following a specified route. After defining tentative courier - order assignments, a commitment
strategy dictates which of these decisions are postponed and which are communicated to couriers.
Furthermore, since a bundle cannot be picked up before all orders are ready, the assignment of a
bundle with a ready time far into the future is likely to be postponed (the most likely outcome of the commitment strategy), our algorithm focuses on finding assignments only for the subset of known upcoming
orders whose ready time falls within t + ∆u, the assignment horizon, Ut = {o ∈ Ot
: eo ≤ t + ∆u}. So,
at optimization time, t, the algorithm determines the best assignment of orders in Ut to the couriers on
duty.
6
3.1 Bundles and routes
While ideally every order should be picked up at its ready time and delivered by its target drop-off time
(derived from target click-to-door time), this goal must be reconciled with the reality of a limited set
of couriers. Especially during busy periods of the day, it may not always be possible to pick up orders
as they leave the kitchen and deliver them individually. Therefore, to better utilize capacity, couriers
may pick-up and deliver multiple orders, increasing the utilization of couriers at the expense of some
freshness loss. At optimization time t, the algorithm determines how many orders should be in a bundle
(defining a target bundle size), and then defines a satisfactory grouping and sequencing of the individual
orders that will be assigned to couriers. Since we always define bundles with a unique route associated
to them, from now on we may refer to bundles as routes indiscriminately.
System intensity and a target bundle size. A target bundle size may simply be defined as a fixed
number throughout the whole operating period, or throughout predefined intervals, such as “lunch” and
“dinner” times. However, to induce robustness and responsiveness in our solution method, we define
such target in a dynamic fashion, in direct relation to a fraction of the form (#orders ready)/(# couriers available),
a rough measure of the amount of work that must be completed with the available resources during a
given period of time. By doing this, we intend to encourage single-order bundles when there are fewer
orders than couriers, and favor larger bundles when there are more orders than couriers and the system
is under pressure. A parametric definition of the target bundle size at optimization time t is:
Zt =

|{o ∈ Ot
: eo ≤ t + ∆1}|
|{d ∈ Dt
: ed ≤ t + ∆2}|
, ∆1 > 0, ∆2 > 0,
where eo is the ready time of order o and ed is the time when courier d becomes available for a new
assignment. Note that it is possible that there are no couriers available before t + ∆2, in which case
Zt
is set to some default value. Specific values for ∆u, ∆1 and ∆2 are set through a tuning procedure,
but, heuristically, for the algorithm to have an anticipatory character, f < ∆u 6 ∆1 and f < ∆u 6 ∆2
should hold
Creation of bundles and delivery routes. Once a system-wide target bundle size Zt has been
determined, the set S =
S
r∈R
Sr of bundles to be assigned is built by processing the upcoming orders at
each restaurant r, Ut,r, following the steps described in Procedure 1.
Note that once a bundle reaches its target size, an additional order is inserted only if this increases
route efficiency, i.e., the time per order delivered in that bundle decreases. Also note that the parameter
β, which controls the importance of freshness in the construction of bundles, is given beforehand (i.e.,
it should be tuned off-line).
3.2 Assignment logic
At the core of our algorithm, the solution of a bipartite matching problem assigns order bundles to
couriers, dictating the next delivery route to be executed by each courier. Such a simple model is able
to capture and balance the trade-off between short-term efficiency and service quality, while ensuring
that, in practical implementations, optimization is not a significant bottleneck in the overall solution
process. But, of course, simplicity comes at the cost of expressiveness: the only levers to guide decisions
in the matching are the weights and feasibility conditions of order-courier pairs, and only so many aspects
of the problem can be captured by these. In an attempt to retain some more control in the assignment
process, specifically around the issue of how to avoid service delays for bundles that are already late,
we introduce a priority scheme: assignments are built by first partitioning the set of relevant bundles
in priority groups based on their “urgency”, and then finding optimal assignments sequentially for each
group.
7
Procedure 1: Bundle generation using parallel-insertion
Input: Ut,r, set of upcoming orders at restaurant r,
Zt
, target bundle size,
and k
r
t
, number of couriers that available at r (see Section 3.3).
Output: Sr, set of bundles from restaurant r to be assigned to couriers.
/* Initial construction */
Sort the orders in Ut,r by non-decreasing ready time;
Compute the target number of bundles to create, mr = max (k
r
t
, d
|Ut,r|/Zte);
Initialize empty routes (bundles) s1, s2, . . . , smr
in Sr;
for o ∈ Ut,r do
Find the route s ∈ Sr and the insertion position is for order o into route s which results in
the minimum increase in route cost, where the route cost of
P
s is
(p,q)∈s
T ravelT ime(p, q) + β
P
p∈s
ServiceDelay(p);
if |s| > Zt and insertion decreases route efficiency then
Disregard s for order o and find the next best route and insertion position (repeat if
necessary)
end
Insert o in route s at position is;
end
/* Improvement by ‘‘remove-reinsert’’ local-search */
for o ∈ Ut,r do
Remove o from its current route;
Given the existing routes in Sr, find route s and position is to re-insert o at minimum cost;
Re-insert o into route s at position is;
end
8
Priority scheme. Orders are classified according to their unavoidable delays in drop-off and pick-up:
• Group I: orders whose target drop-off time is impossible to achieve.
• Group II: orders not in Group I which can no longer be picked up at their ready time.
• Group III: orders not in Group I or II.
A bundle is assigned the highest priority of any of its constituent individual orders.
By creating assignments sequentially for these priority groups, urgent deliveries are more likely to
achieve an earlier pickup time than if all orders were included in one big matching problem, which may
make a difference at the time of commitment, preventing the postponement of delivery for orders that
are already late. Similarly, in matchings where there are fewer couriers available than bundles to be
assigned, a solution obtained with this priority scheme averts situations where orders that are already
late do not get a courier assigned.
Three alternative optimization models, with increasing degrees of complexity, are considered.
3.2.1 Linear assignment model
The simplest assignment model, and the one used by default in our solution algorithm, is a bipartite
matching with no side constraints, i.e., a linear program. To define it, we introduce the following
notation:
- Ns: number of individual orders in bundle s,
- θ: constant “penalty” for delays in the pick-up of an order or bundle of orders,
- πs,d: pick-up time of bundle s if assigned to courier d. Note that, by definition, πs,d ≥ max
o∈s
{eo}.
- δ
s
o,d: drop-off time of order o in bundle s if s is assigned to courier d (note that this value depends
on the time that d can pick up s).
- xs,d: 0-1 decision variable for the assignment of bundle s to courier d.
Using these definitions, the problem is:
max
x
X
d∈Dt
X
s∈S


Ns
max
o∈s
{δ
s
o,d} − ed
− θ

πs,d − max
o∈s
{eo}


 xs,d (1a)
s.t. X
s∈S
xs,d 6 1, ∀ d ∈ D (1b)
X
d∈D∪{0}
xs,d = 1, ∀ s ∈ S (1c)
xs,d ∈ {0, 1}, ∀ s ∈ S, d ∈ D ∪ {0} (1d)
Observe that the first term in the matching weights captures a “throughput” value, dividing the
number of orders in a delivery route, Ns, by the time required to execute the assignment, max
o∈s
{δ
s
o,d}−ed.
Meanwhile, the second term relates to the pick-up delay, which causes a loss of freshness in meals,
πs,d − max
o∈s
{eo}. The model formulation makes use of an artificial courier collecting excess bundles
(by defining these artificial assignments to have a value strictly lower than the value of any feasible
assignments).
3.2.2 More complex integer programming assignment models
A relatively simple but powerful departure from the previous formulation is to drop the requirement
that the set of bundles in the assignment problem be pairwise disjoint with respect to the set U of orders
to be assigned. Instead, that condition can be enforced as a constraint in the optimization problem.
The freedom thus gained can be leveraged to mitigate some potential pitfalls inherent in the process of
assigning (at most) one bundle to each courier in every optimization run.
9
Let S be the set of bundles considered for assignment, which can simply be the S of bundles generated
by Procedure 1, or it may be larger. A simple and effective way to create more routes is to break each
bundle of S into two pieces, as described in Procedure 2:
Procedure 2: Split original bundles by their ready times
Input: Set of bundles S.
Output: S, ground set of not necessarily order-disjoint bundles.
Initialize S
1 ← ∅, S
2 ← ∅;
for s ∈ S do
Sort orders in s by increasing ready time, and relabel as o1, . . . , ok (ok is ready the latest);
for j ∈ {1, . . . , k − 1} do
Create bundle s
1
j
, containing o1, . . . , oj
, the first j orders to be ready from s. Preserve
sequence of deliveries originally prescribed in s for these orders;
S
1 ← S1 ∪ s
1
j
;
Create bundle s
2
j
, containing oj+1, . . . , ok, which are ready after oj
. Preserve the
sequence of deliveries originally prescribed in s for these orders;
S
2 ← S2 ∪ s
2
j
;
end
end
S ← S ∪ S1 ∪ S2
;
The motivation of Procedure 2 is to prevent the assignment of large bundles in S (which are less
likely to be ready for immediate pick-up) from unnecessarily delaying the dispatch of orders that could
be delivered soon (bundles in S
1
), while at the same time attempting to find a courier (and, if necessary,
make a partial commitment) for orders that will not be ready as soon (bundles in S
2
).
Another extension is to allow two bundles to be assigned to a courier, in which case the courier
completes the bundles one after the other in a prescribed sequence. This can mitigate a potential pitfall
of the myopic approach, arising when two bundles are assigned to different couriers even though they
could have been delivered more efficiently by a single courier without degrading service quality. Define
Q ⊆ S ∪ S × S as the set of one or two bundles that can be assigned to a courier. Q is constructed by
finding all pairs of bundles in S that can be concatenated in such a way that second bundle does not
suffer an excessive freshness loss. We define a freshness loss tolerance λ > 0, and follow Procedure 3:
Procedure 3: Find compatible “follow-on” bundle pairs
Input: Ground set of bundles S, freshness loss tolerance λ > 0.
Output: Set Q ⊆ S ∪ S × S of routes to be assigned to couriers.
Initialize Q ← S;
for s ∈ S do
for s
0 ∈ S \ {s} do
if s ∩ s
0 = ∅ then
Compute πs,s0
,d;
if rs
0 + λ > πs,s0
,d then
Q ← Q ∪ {(s, s0
)};
end
end
end
end
Note that if λ = 0, only pairs of bundles where the second pick-up can be done at the earliest possible
time are considered compatible. In contrast, if λ is large enough, any pair of bundles with no orders in
10
common is a compatible “follow-on” pair.
Assignment model variations. For any order o, denote the set of routes that contain o by Q(o)
and define variables:
xq,d ∈ {0, 1} : indicates whether route q is assigned to courier d, for q ∈ Q, d ∈ D ∪ {0}
yo ∈ {0, 1} : indicates whether order o is assigned to any courier, for o ∈ U
Using these definitions, the assignment problem can be formulated as:
max
x
X
d∈D
X
q∈Q
wq,dxq,d +
X
o∈O
p(1 − yo) (2a)
s.t. X
q∈Q
xq,d 6 1 ∀ d ∈ D (2b)
X
d∈D∪{0}
xq,d = 1 ∀ q ∈ Q (2c)
X
d∈D
X
q∈Q(o)
xq,d 6 1 ∀ o ∈ U (2d)
X
d∈D
X
q∈Q(o)
xq,d > yo ∀ o ∈ U (2e)
xq,d ∈ {0, 1} ∀ q ∈ Q, d ∈ D ∪ {0} (2f)
yo ∈ {0, 1} ∀ o ∈ U (2g)
Constraints (2b) guarantee that each courier is assigned at most one route, while (2c) guarantee that
each route is assigned to one courier (it may be 0, a “dummy” courier). Constraints (2d) guarantee that
each order is in exactly one of the routes assigned. If an order o ∈ O is not included in any of the routes
assigned to real couriers, a value p is added to the objective value (with p < min
q,d
{wq,d}, to discourage
null order assignments if at all possible, i.e. to assign as many orders as possible to real couriers). The
weight of a (q, d) assignment is wq,d = us,d if q consists of only one bundle s, or wq,d = us,d + vs,s0
,d if q
consists of a sequence of bundles (s, s0
), where u and v are defined as:
us,d =
Ns
max
o∈s
{δ
s
o,d} − ed
+ θ(πs,d − max
o∈s
{eo}) ∀s ∈ S, d ∈ D (3)
vs,s0
,d =
Ns
0
max
o∈s
0
{δ
s,s0
o,d } − max
o∈s
{δ
s
o,d}
+ θ(πs,s0
,d − max
o∈s
0
{eo}) ∀(s, s0
) ∈ Q, d ∈ D (4)
Here Ns and Ns
0 denote the number of orders in bundles s and s
0
, respectively; ed denotes the time that
courier d is available to begin a new route; max
o∈s
{δ
s
o,d} is the last drop-off time in s if d is assigned to s;
max
o∈s
0
{δ
s,s0
o,d } is the last drop-off time in s
0
if this bundle is served by d immediately after completion of
deliveries of s; max
o∈s
{eo} is the time that s is ready for pick-up; πs,d is the earliest possible time that d
can pick up s; and πs,s0
,d is the earliest possible time that d can pick up s
0 after having picked up and
delivered s.
We have explored two alternative models in addition to the (basic) linear model:
(i) A “medium complexity” model, consisting of integer program (2) and Q defined by Procedure 3
acting on S, the bundles created by Procedure 1.
(ii) A “high complexity” model, consisting of integer program (2) and Q defined by Procedure 3 acting
on S, the set of bundles resulting from Procedure 2.
11
3.3 Commitment strategy
One of the ways through which a rolling horizon algorithm attempts to mitigate uncertainty is the
postponement of decisions that are not time-critical. In light of the characteristics of the MDRP, we
adopt a “lazy” strategy that decomposes assignments into two travel segments: “inbound” travel to the
restaurant, and an “outbound” delivery trip (i.e., an open route).
Two-stage additive commitment. For each tentative assignment (s, d), of order bundle s and
courier d, in the solution of a matching problem, the commitment strategy dictates:
1. If d can reach restaurant rs before t + f and all orders in s are estimated to be ready by t + f,
make a final commitment of d to s: instruct d to travel to rs, pick up and deliver orders in s.
2. If d cannot reach rs by t + f, but completes its last assignment before t + f, make a partial
commitment: instruct d to travel to rs and wait there for a finalized order assignment, which is
guaranteed to include orders in s, and possibly more.
3. If d cannot start a new assignment by t + f, ignore the assignment.
4. Exception: If any order in s has been ready for more than x minutes, override the rule and make
a final commitment.
The motivation to send a courier to a restaurant without committing the delivery of a specific bundle
– as would be the case in a simpler single-stage commitment rule – is that, even if travel should begin
without delay, the courier can be matched again in the next optimization, while en-route, and the
composition of the bundle to be picked up at the restaurant may change. On the other hand, if the
courier is busy until t + f, waiting for the next optimization will not delay the pick-up or drop-off of
any order.
We call this strategy “additive” because if s is partially committed to d at time t, then at optimization
time t + f, we force the bundle assigned to d to include s. Hence, orders in a bundle partially assigned
to d are guaranteed to be the final assignment to d. While this is not the most flexible policy that can
be conceived (as one could completely decouple inbound and outbound assignments), there are good
practical arguments for such consistency (e.g., to mitigate the risk of couriers rejecting time-critical
assignments).
Two-stage additive commitment logic for assignments with more than one bundle. In the
more complex assignment models, when dealing with the assignment of courier d to route q = (s1, s2),
the commitment rule is generalized in a way that delays final decisions on the actions to be taken after
the completion of s1, so long as this does not generate a decrease in the service quality of orders in
s2. Concretely, given a tentative assignment of order batch q = (s1, s2) to courier d, our commitment
strategy dictates:
1. If d can complete the delivery of s1 and pick up s2 by time t + f, make a final commitment to
both s1 and s2.
2. If d can complete the delivery of s1 by t+f but cannot pick up s2 by t+f, make a final commitment
to s1 and a partial commitment to s2.
3. If d can only pick up s1 by t + f, i.e., if d can reach restaurant rs1 by t + f and all orders in s are
estimated to be ready by t + f, make a final commitment of d to s1: instruct d to travel to rs1
,
pick up and deliver orders in s1.
4. If d cannot pick up s1 by t + f, but completes its last assignment before t + f, make a partial
commitment for d: instruct d to travel to rs1 and wait there for a finalized order assignment
(guaranteed to include orders in s1.
5. If d cannot start a new assignment by t + f, ignore the assignment completely.
6. Exception 1: If any order in s1 has been ready for more than x minutes, make a final commitment
to s1.
12
7. Exception 2: If any order in s2 has been ready for more than x minutes, make a final commitment
to s1 and s2.
It is worth noting that our two-stage additive commitment strategy is consistent with the MDRP operating environment that allows assignment updates: a courier may be instructed to move to a restaurant
as soon as there is at least one order for the courier to pick up, but before a final determination is made
about the exact set or sequence of orders to be assigned. Furthermore, a single pre-positioning move is
used by our algorithm: at the beginning of each courier duty time, a randomized instruction is handed
to the courier, telling him to move to a nearby restaurant (the rest of instructions are deterministic,
only making use of information already revealed.)
4 Computational study
In this section, we describe the design and results of a computational study to assess the quality of
solutions produced by our algorithm (in its different variations), and how this performance relates to
instance characteristics and key algorithmic features. In a set of appendices, we present visualizations
of our instances as well as a cache of experimental results.
4.1 MDRP instances
Instances have been crafted to resemble realistic day-long order and courier patterns in metropolitan
areas, based on real-life historical data from different cities and days. We create a total of 240 instances
of varying sizes, ranging from 242 to 3213 orders, 54 to 323 restaurants, 53 to 457 couriers, and 123 to
1542 courier hours. Times are represented as non-negative integers (with zero representing the start of
business hours). Locations have been anonymized while preserving their overall distribution, and are
represented as (x, y) coordinates in meters from a reference point. The travel time from `1 = (x1, y1)
to `2 = (x2, y2) is the product of their Euclidean distance and a multiplier γ, rounded up to the next
integer: t`1,`2 =
l
γ
p
(x2 − x1)
2 + (y2 − y1)
2
m
(i.e.,
1
γ
is the speed of vehicles in the instance). Note that
rounding may lead to cases where travel times do not satisfy the triangle inequality.
Service times at all restaurants are set to 4 minutes, and service times at all order delivery locations
are likewise set to 4 minutes. The click-to-door target is 40 minutes in all instances, and the maximum
allowed click-to-door is 90 minutes. Couriers are paid $10 per order delivered and are promised a $ 15
minimum compensation per hour.
For each “seed” instance, we have prepared a set of 24 variations:
• Varying size of order and courier sets. Given an order set, two instance variations are
obtained by sampling 50% of the orders directly (uniform sampling with repetitions) or indirectly,
through sampling of restaurants (where including a restaurant means including all the orders
placed at it). Courier sets are reduced in a similar fashion, sampling roughly half of the shifts
at each start time (rounding up to the nearest integer number of shifts when necessary), while
ensuring that the scheduled courier hours are reduced by 50%. These variations preserve some of
the geographical and temporal distribution of orders. A detailed exposition about the reduction
procedures for order and courier sets is available in Appendix A.
• Varying travel times. Different location densities can be induced by using different γ multipliers.
This preserves the relative spatial distribution of orders but, of course, impacts the nature of the
solutions, as travel time changes (e.g., orders served per courier hour, number of bundled orders,
etc.). Concretely, to build these instance variations, the original multiplier of each instance is
reduced by 25%, producing a short travel time version.
• Varying structure of courier schedules. Schedules can resemble the patterns observed historically, or follow an “optimized” distribution. To ensure fairness in comparisons, optimized schedules
preserve the total number of courier-hours of their historical counterparts. Details about the con13
struction of optimized shift schedules are available in Appendix B.
• Varying preparation times. We can modify the degree of flexibility in the dispatch of upcoming
orders in an instance by changing the time it takes to prepare each meal, i.e. the difference between
the time when an order is ready and its placement time: given a target click-to-door time, longer
preparation times imply that less time is available for a timely pickup once the order becomes
ready In our instance set, these instance variations are built by increasing the original preparation
times by 25%.
To facilitate the study of different algorithms and solution strategies, the MDRP instances, together
with a script to check feasibility and evaluate performance metrics of a solution, are available online at:
https://github.com/grubhub/mdrplib
Details about instance and solution encoding can be found in Appendices C and D.
4.2 Uncontrolled instance features
Beyond the features controlled during the instance generation process, we have focused our analysis
on a set of structural properties whose importance has been long recognized in the dynamic routing
literature [26]. We measure four features for each instance: geographic dispersion, dynamism, urgency
and flexibility.
• Geographic dispersion captures the separation between restaurant and delivery locations over
the instance geography. Other things equal, the more disperse locations are, the longer it takes to
complete an average route, and the harder it becomes to build routes that achieve an acceptable
performance (in order click-to-door, courier utilization, etc.). We measure geographic dispersion
in terms of the travel time from restaurant to delivery location of any order, and the travel time
between any pair of restaurants, using the instance mean and standard deviation across all relevant
distance travel time measures. More precisely, we define the dispersion of an instance as:
dispersion =
P
a∈R,b∈R
t`a,`b
|R × R|
+
P
o∈O
t`ro
,`o
|O|
• Dynamism captures the continuity of change in the information available over the planning
period. Under this definition, an instance where orders arrive in a few “bursts” is considered
less dynamic than an instance where orders arrive at an even rate over time. For simplicity, we
measure only the degree of dynamism of the arrival stream of orders (disregarding information
from courier sign-on and sign-off events), using the method introduced in Van Lon et al. [26],
which we reproduce below for the sake of completeness. The degree of dynamism of an instance
is always a number between 0 (no dynamism, i.e., all orders are simultaneously revealed) and 1
(“maximal” dynamism), computed as follows.
Let n be the number of orders placed and A be the non-decreasing sequence of order placement
times. Let H be the sequence of inter-arrival times, H = (η1, η2, . . . , ηn−1) = (a2−a1, . . . , an−an−1).
Let T = min{max
c∈C
{lc}, an} + τmax be regarded as the operating period, and define ϕ =
T
n
as the
“perfect inter-arrival time” (corresponding to arrivals with maximum dynamism). Define the
sequence of penalized inter-arrival deviations as
σ0 = 0, σi = (ϕ − ηi +
ϕ − ηi
ϕ
σi−1)
+ for i = 1, . . . , n − 1
Note that this measure penalizes “bursts” of arrivals over a short period. Then, the instance
14
degree of dynamism is defined as:
dod = 1 −
nP−1
i=1
σi
nP−1
i=1
σ¯i
where
nP−1
i=1
σ¯i
is a normalizing constant defined by ¯σi = ϕ + (ϕ−ηi
ϕ
σi)
+ (capturing the maximum
possible penalized deviations).
• Urgency captures the range of time available to complete the delivery of orders in a satisfactory
way. We define “soft” and “hard” measures, relative to target and maximum click-to-door values,
respectively. For clarity, we use “reaction time” measures, negatively related to urgency: the
higher the reaction time of orders, the less urgency in the instance. As in [26], we summarize the
urgency level of an instance by the mean of individual order reaction times:
reactsof t =
P
o∈O

τ − t`ro
,`o
+
|O|
reacthard =
P
o∈O

τmax − t`ro
,`o
+
|O|
• Flexibility is closely related to urgency, but not completely equivalent. It captures the effective
range of time available to dispatch an order, if this is going to be delivered in a satisfactory way.
Measuring flexibility is important in meal delivery, because relatively long preparation times (with
respect to service targets and guarantees) can make it hard to deliver an order on time, even if
there is a large reaction time: if the order is not ready, a part of this reaction time is useless. We
measure flexibility as follows:
flexsof t =
P
o∈O

(ao + τ ) − (eo + t`ro
,`o
)
+
|O|
flexhard =
P
o∈O

(ao + τmax) − (eo + t`ro
,`o
)
+
|O|
4.3 Analysis variables
Apart from categorical identifiers for each set of instance variations, and in addition to dispersion and
degree of dynamism, we select the most informative measures of urgency, flexibility, and size by exploring
the correlations in the instance dataset.
It is not surprising that the soft and hard versions of urgency and flexibility measures are correlated,
as shown in Table 1. Therefore, to simplify the analysis, we focus only on hard reaction time and soft
pickup flexibility, the pair of urgency and flexibility measures with the smallest correlation. Similarly,
number of orders and total courier hours are highly correlated, as shown in Table 2. Since courier hours
in an instances have been decided in advance, based on forecasts about the number and distribution of
orders, we decide to measure instance size by the number of orders, discard total courier hours from
the analysis variables, and include the ratio of orders to courier hours, which indicates how “busy” or
congested an instance turns out to be (instances with a unusually high ratio suggest that the forecast
might have been an underestimation, or perhaps there were not enough couriers to keep up with expected
demand).
15
measure soft reaction time hard reaction time soft pickup flex hard pickup flex
soft reaction time 1.00 0.62 0.89 0.94
hard reaction time 0.62 1.00 0.41 0.46
soft pickup flex 0.89 0.41 1.00 0.96
hard pickup flex 0.94 0.46 0.96 1.00
Table 1: Correlation matrix of urgency and flexibility measures
measure orders courier hours orders/courier hour
orders 1.00 0.90 0.31
courier hours 0.90 1.00 -0.06
orders per courier hour 0.31 -0.06 1.00
Table 2: Correlation matrix of orders, courier hours, and orders per courier hour
Having defined the analysis variables, let us briefly summarize the structural properties of the instance
set. The histograms in the diagonal of Figure 1 illustrate the marginal distribution of the adopted key
instance characteristic measures (aggregated in 8 buckets), and the hexagonal bins in the lower triangle
of Figure 1 illustrate their pairwise-joint distribution.
Instances have degrees of dynamism ranging between 0.3 and 0.6, more frequently in the 0.4-0.55
range, and the most significant interactions of dynamism are with size (largest instances are also the least
dynamic) and geographic dispersion (less disperse instances tend to be less dynamic). Most instances in
the set have less than 1000 orders and a relatively dense geography (in most instances, individual-order
inbound and outbound trips would on average total less than 20 minutes). Hard reaction times values
range from 80.7 to 84.5 minutes on average, and shows some correlation only with geographic dispersion:
this is not unexpected, as both measures are a function of direct travel times from restaurant to delivery
location. Soft pickup flexibility, ranging from 10.4 to 19.4 minutes, exhibits no strong correlation to
any other feature. The ratio of orders placed to courier hours, ranging from 1.2 to 2.5, shows little
correlation with all other instance features, but it is important to note that the largest instances (2500
or more orders) all have a very high ratio.
4.4 Algorithm configurations
For each instance, we obtain 21 solutions by running slightly different versions of the rolling horizon
algorithm: the default algorithm, 5 variations differing in one feature only, and 15 variations with
alternative values of optimization frequency, assignment horizon, order and courier bundling intensity
lookaheads. In detail, the algorithm variations explored are defined as follows:
Different optimization frequencies. Set the time between successive optimizations to f = 5 or
f = 2 minutes (all other settings at their default values).
Different order-assignment horizon and myopic lookaheads. Experiment setting a lookahead
of 2f or 4f (default) minutes for the numerator (orders) of the target size ratio calculation; setting a
lookahead of 2f or 4f (default) minutes for the denominator (couriers) of the target size ratio calculation;
and setting a horizon of 2f (default) or 4f minutes to limit the set of orders open for assignment. In
sum, for each value of f, 8 configurations are considered.
Bundling intensity rules. Explore two algorithm variations, one using dynamic target bundle
sizes (default), and the other explicitly forbidding any consolidation (i.e., always assign couriers to
single orders).
Assignment prioritization. Enforce three order priority groups in the assignment process (default), or find assignments for all orders in a single matching problem per optimization run.
16



 

















	
 






















  	 
   



Figure 1: Distribution of key instance features
Commitment. Follow the two-stage additive commitment strategy (default), or use a single-stage
lazy strategy, where no more changes can be made in the “outbound” portion of the assignment as soon
as couriers begin the“inbound” movement to the restaurant.
Complexity of assignment model. Consider the three different models described in Section 3.2
to govern the assignment process.
Before conducting the experiments, reasonable default values for a series of secondary parameters in the
algorithm must be found. We tune the algorithm with a hierarchical service objective: first ensure the
17
Variation id Description
0 Default (f = 5, ∆u = 10, ∆1 = 10, ∆2 = 10, two-stage commitment,
3 priority groups, dynamic bundling, LP assignment model)
1 f = 5, ∆u = 10, ∆1 = 10, ∆2 = 20
2 f = 5, ∆u = 10, ∆1 = 20, ∆2 = 10
3 f = 5, ∆u = 10, ∆1 = 20, ∆2 = 20
4 f = 5, ∆u = 20, ∆1 = 10, ∆2 = 10
5 f = 5, ∆u = 20, ∆1 = 10, ∆2 = 20
6 f = 5, ∆u = 20, ∆1 = 20, ∆2 = 10
7 f = 5, ∆u = 20, ∆1 = 20, ∆2 = 20
8 f = 2, ∆u = 4, ∆1 = 4, ∆2 = 4
9 f = 2, ∆u = 4, ∆1 = 4, ∆2 = 8
10 f = 2, ∆u = 4, ∆1 = 8, ∆2 = 4
11 f = 2, ∆u = 4, ∆1 = 8, ∆2 = 8
12 f = 2, ∆u = 8, ∆1 = 4, ∆2 = 4
13 f = 2, ∆u = 8, ∆1 = 4, ∆2 = 8
14 f = 2, ∆u = 8, ∆1 = 8, ∆2 = 4
15 f = 2, ∆u = 8, ∆1 = 8, ∆2 = 8
16 single-stage commitment
17 no priority groups
18 no bundling
19 medium complexity assignment model
20 high complexity assignment model
Table 3: Algorithm variations
delivery of a very high proportion of the orders placed, and then minimize average click-to-door. Details
about the tuning process can be found in Appendix E.
4.5 Experiment results
As a preamble to our analysis of experimental results, we benchmark the solutions obtained by our
algorithm on a subset of instances with relatively few orders and couriers with the solutions obtained by
the exact algorithm presented in [30], which assumes a clairvoyant decision maker, i.e., all information
about orders and couriers is known in advance.
4.5.1 Comparison of algorithm with exact method
The solutions reported in [30] have been obtained by solving an integer program with minimization of
the click-to-door time as objective. They are all provably optimal or near-optimal (maximum optimality
gap is 0.16%, i.e., a couple of seconds away from the lower bound). In the integer program, delivery of
all orders is enforced as a feasibility condition. It must be noted that the formulation in [30] restricts
bundle sizes to be at most 2, however, we have reason to believe that the effect of this restriction is very
small: in the solutions produced by our algorithm for these instances only an average of 3% of the total
number of orders are part of bundles of size greater than 2.
As shown in Table 4, on this set of small instances, our algorithm produces high-quality solutions
with respect to mean click-to-door time, on average only 4% above the optimal value (about 70 seconds,
in absolute terms). At the same time, mean ready-to-pickup time performance of our algorithm is on
average 112% (45 seconds) above the value of the exact solutions, even though this measure has not
18
orders
restaurants
couriers
courier hours
Rolling Horizon Heuristic
Exact
Algorithm
(minimizing
total CTD)
Heur/Exact
instance CtD RtP CtD RtP CtD RtP
0o50t100s1p100 252 93 61 151 31.19 2.52 29.81 1.46 1.05 1.73
0o50t100s1p125 34.67 2.27 33.40 1.23 1.04 1.85
0o50t100s2p100 72 146 29.79 1.22 28.96 0.64 1.03 1.91
0o50t100s2p125 34.18 1.85 32.60 0.53 1.05 3.49
0o50t75s1p100 61 151 28.4 1.65 27.49 0.96 1.03 1.72
0o50t75s1p125 31.62 1.19 31.10 0.78 1.02 1.53
0o50t75s2p100 72 146 27.29 0.58 26.83 0.30 1.02 1.93
0o50t75s2p125 31.19 0.7 30.52 0.24 1.02 2.92
0r50t100s1p100 242 54 61 151 32.46 2.14 30.76 1.13 1.06 1.89
0r50t100s1p125 36.75 2.16 34.66 0.97 1.06 2.23
0r50t100s2p100 73 146 31.21 1.11 29.93 0.43 1.04 2.58
0r50t100s2p125 35.6 1.22 33.86 0.26 1.05 4.69
0r50t75s1p100 61 151 29.57 1.04 28.47 0.67 1.04 1.55
0r50t75s1p125 33.71 1.19 32.45 0.55 1.04 2.16
0r50t75s2p100 73 146 29.03 0.64 27.95 0.21 1.04 3.05
0r50t75s2p125 33.41 0.84 32.00 0.16 1.04 5.25
average 31.879 1.40 30.674 0.66 1.04 2.53
Table 4: Comparison of solutions obtained by our algorithm and exact solutions
been directly optimized.
More challenging large-scale instances may exhibit important differences from the small instances
in this benchmark (e.g., more bundling opportunities), and there is no guarantee that performance will
follow a similar trend. That being said, these preliminary results are certainly encouraging, as they are
consistent with the heuristic argument for a rolling-horizon approach: given that dispatching decisions
are heavily time-constrained, information about the distant future tends to be of little value.
4.5.2 Performance effects of controlled instance characteristics
Tables 5-8 summarize the impact of each of the controlled instance variations on performance metrics
over all experiment runs (i.e., over all algorithm variations). Figures 11-24 in Appendix F illustrate
these controlled effects in more detail.
Table 5 shows that leveraging accurate predictive information with off-line optimization techniques,
in order to schedule the right capacity at the right time, can yield significant improvements in all service
metrics, while reducing performance variability, and even reducing costs. Most dramatically, optimizing
shifts can reduce the number of orders undelivered by 60% and ready-to-pickup mean by 40%. We also
note that with historical courier shifts the number of orders per bundle increases, which is consistent
with the algorithm using bundles as a recourse to mitigate capacity shortages: the more couriers signed
on at productive times of the day, the more effective capacity over time, and the smaller the target
bundle sizes.
Table 6 summarizes the performance sensitivity of the algorithm to vehicle speed. If travel times are
25% faster, orders undelivered can be reduced by more than half, while improving mean click-to-door
times by 10%, and slashing down the overage mean by more than a third and the ready-to-pickup mean
19
courier shift schedules paired differences
historical optimized (opt. - hist.)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.42 0.91 0.16 0.28 -0.25 0.90
CtoD mean 33.7 3.78 32.38 3.03 -1.32 1.46
CtoD overage 3.21 1.84 2.64 1.36 -0.57 0.93
RtoP mean 2.79 2.08 1.64 1.09 -1.15 1.23
utilization mean 0.63 0.12 0.64 0.12 0.01 0.02
cost per order 11.58 1.34 11.22 1.15 -0.35 0.31
orders per bundle 1.11 0.07 1.08 0.06 -0.02 0.03
Table 5: Differences in performance of instances with optimized courier schedules vs. historical schedules
travel time multiplier paired diff.
100% 75% (75% tt. -100% tt.)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.36 0.88 0.22 0.4 -0.14 0.66
CtoD mean 34.79 3.35 31.29 2.64 -3.51 1.33
CtoD overage 3.54 1.8 2.31 1.18 -1.23 0.82
RtoP mean 2.95 2 1.48 1.04 -1.47 1.18
utilization mean 0.68 0.12 0.6 0.11 -0.08 0.02
cost per order 11.34 1.25 11.47 1.27 0.13 0.17
orders per bundle 1.11 0.07 1.08 0.05 -0.02 0.03
Table 6: Differences in performance of instances with travel times faster by 25% vs original
by almost half. On the other hand, however, total costs increase, as the work in the system increases
(orders undelivered drop) but is distributed less evenly (utilization mean and 10th percentile drop) and
the system is forced to spend more on minimum compensation complements. We believe this illustrates
the downside of having “too many” drivers at the wrong times of the day: when travel times are slower,
routes take longer to complete and, at any point in time, more vehicles need to be on the road (as
orders have not slowed down their arrival and the same service standard must be met), thus leading
the algorithm to pull couriers that are available at a remote location into the action. On the other
hand, when travel times are faster, there is a relative surplus of couriers but the algorithm has little
incentive to put them to work if they are not in a central location, as this may degrade service quality
and potential cost-savings related to the compensation scheme are not considered by the algorithm.
Table 7 illustrates the sensitivity of performance with respect to preparation time. If orders take
25% longer to be ready, orders undelivered almost double, while click-to-door deteriorates by 12% on
average, driving up the overage mean up by 80%. Interestingly, longer preparation times do not force the
algorithm to sacrifice ready-to-pickup time performance significantly, which indicates that the observed
increase in click-to-door time is largely unavoidable. Furthermore, despite completing fewer deliveries
(thus reducing total delivery payments), cost per order improves only slightly, as a consequence of having
couriers scheduled ’out-of-phase’, logging-on for duty during periods of low productivity at the beginning
of lunch and dinner times (thus increasing the total minimum compensation payments).
Table 8 illustrates the performance effect of halving the number of orders and courier hours, either
by thinning the overall order arrival process (o50) or by sampling a large enough subset of restaurants
(r50). By and large, instances of original size tend to have better service performance than their
reduced counterparts (thanks to the higher location density), at a slightly higher cost (a product of
20
preparation time multiplier paired differences
100% prep. time 125% prep. time (125% pt. - 100% pt.)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.2 0.6 0.38 0.76 0.18 0.31
CtoD mean 31.1 2.86 34.98 2.94 3.88 0.47
CtoD overage 2.07 1.25 3.78 1.54 1.71 0.46
RtoP mean 2.21 1.74 2.22 1.77 0.01 0.31
utilization mean 0.64 0.12 0.64 0.12 0.00 0.01
cost per order 11.41 1.25 11.39 1.27 -0.01 0.12
orders per bundle 1.09 0.06 1.1 0.06 0.00 0.01
Table 7: Differences in performance of instances with preparation times slower by 25% vs original
instance size reduction paired differences
o100 o50 r50 (o50-o100) (r50 - o100)
mean std mean std mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.2 0.4 0.38 0.95 0.28 0.57 0.19 0.80 0.08 0.39
CtoD mean 32.55 3.17 33.29 3.75 33.27 3.47 0.74 1.32 0.72 1.52
CtoD overage 2.75 1.47 2.98 1.81 3.05 1.62 0.24 0.81 0.30 0.76
RtoP mean 1.68 1.28 2.61 2.13 2.36 1.61 0.94 1.16 0.69 0.66
utilization mean 0.62 0.12 0.66 0.12 0.64 0.12 0.04 0.02 0.03 0.02
cost per order 11.5 1.31 11.28 1.2 11.42 1.25 -0.22 0.19 -0.09 0.21
orders per bundle 1.1 0.06 1.06 0.05 1.12 0.07 -0.04 0.03 0.01 0.02
Table 8: Differences in performance of instance size reductions vs original
actually executing more deliveries). Furthermore, we highlight that in reduced instances, at any point
in time there tend to be fewer restaurants with orders in preparation, and it takes longer on average for
couriers to drive to the next pick-up (even if delivery locations are at a similar average distance from
their associated restaurant). This is consistent with the results which show that, relatively, ready-topickup measures degrade considerably more than click-to-door measures when instances are reduced:
the algorithm struggles to find couriers that can make it on time to pick-up, but can still build routes
that mitigate the delay impact on click-to-door.
Focusing now on the difference between both reduction types, r50 instances fare better than o50
instances on orders undelivered, utilization and ready-to-pickup measures, while in the case of click-todoor, r50 instances fare better on the average measure, but worse in worst-case measures. o50 instances
achieve a lower cost per order than r50 instances, but only because the algorithm cannot complete
as many deliveries. To interpret these trends, consider that o50 instances tend to have less orders
per restaurant than r50 (and o100) instances, i.e., less consolidation opportunities than r50 instances.
Consistently, the results show that o50 instances make less use of bundling than the original instances
(because it is difficult), while r50 instances use bundling more intensely than the original instances
(because it is necessary, to cope with higher geographic dispersion) and o50 instances (because there
are more opportunities.)
4.5.3 Performance effect of instance structural properties
Figure 2 summarizes the marginal effect of each instance feature on the set of performance measures over
all experiment runs with the default algorithm settings (We focus on this variant in order to simplify
the analysis, as we have no direct control over the structural properties being studied).
21
0
1
2
3
4
% undeliv.
25
30
35
40
CtD
40
50
60
CtD 90%
0
2
4
6
8
CtD Over.
0
2
4
6
8
RtP
0
10
20
RtP 90%
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
util.
0.2
0.4
0.6
util. 10%
10
12
14
cost/order
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
dynamism
1.1
1.2
orders/bundle
82
84
hard react. time
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
soft pickup flex.
1000
2000
3000
orders
1.5
2.0
2.5
orders/courier_h
20
30
dispersion
Figure 2: Effect of each instance feature on overall performance
22
As dynamism increases, utilization and orders per bundle tend to decrease, while cost per order
tends to increase. This is expected, as consolidation opportunities that help defray delivery costs are
more likely to be available when orders arrive in bursts. Except for a couple of outliers (illustrated in
more depth in Table 9), the percentage of orders undelivered is always in the 0%-2% range, and tends
to decrease slightly with an increasing degree of dynamism. Moreover, instances with very low and very
high dynamism achieve a more consistent percentage of orders undelivered than instances with mid-range
dynamism. A similar variability pattern is observable for click-to-door and ready-to-pickup measures,
which suggests that that there is another factor at play, not discernible in Figure 1 and Figure 2, driving
this behavior. On closer inspection, the outliers and the interaction plots in Appendix G show that a
high percentage of orders undelivered always corresponds to a high ratio of orders to scheduled courier
hours. While, given the available data, we can not establish the cause of the understaffed schedules,
errors in forecasting or planning may be to blame.
As expected, the results show that urgency and flexibility have pronounced adverse effects in most
measures, except cost per order. The linear trends in Figure 2 suggest that an additional minute of hard
reaction time could reduce click-to-door roughly as much as 100 seconds in mean, 20 seconds in overage,
and 2.5 minutes in the 90th percentile. Meanwhile, an additional minute of soft pickup flexibility could
reduce click-to-door roughly as much as 1.25 minutes in mean, and 30 seconds in overage. Given that
urgency and flexibility are defined in terms of click-to-door target and maximum, choosing the right
values for these parameters in realistic applications is of utmost importance.
The ratio of orders placed to courier hours scheduled affects all performance measures as expected:
higher capacity relative to demand is tied to improvements in service performance. However, this
improvement comes at a steep price: a decrease of the ratio of orders per courier hour from 2.5 to 1.25
(e.g., a doubling of the number of courier hours) increases costs by more than 3 cost units per order
(i.e., about 30%), pulling ready-to-pickup mean close to its lower limit of 0, but buying a reduction of
less than 4 minutes in click-to-door mean.
Interestingly, the size of instances does not affect ready-to-pickup mean and 90th percentile values,
while the percentage of orders undelivered and click-to-door mean values suffer only a slight degradation
in large instances. On the other hand, overage and 90th percentile click-to-door times do increase
significantly with the number of orders placed. Moreover, the number of orders placed is positively
correlated with the average size of bundles and average courier utilization. All this suggests that the
algorithm fends off the challenge from larger instances by assigning larger routes, even if the click-to-door
of the last orders delivered will suffer greatly, in order to achieve a better average performance.
However, it must be noted that in the case of the orders/courier hours ratio, its linear relationship
with these performance metrics is much stronger, and (as shown in Figure 1) the relatively few instances
with very large order sets have a very high ratio of orders to courier hours. Hence, size may not be the
driver of bundling intensity and courier utilization (and service performance), but instead this is the
balance between orders and courier hours.
Surprisingly, dispersion is not the strongest predictor of bundling intensity. In fact, out of the
structural properties considered, dispersion has the weakest linear association to orders per bundle: an
increase of 20 minutes in the dispersion measure brings the average number of orders per bundle up by
0.02 units only. Cost and service metrics exhibit a clearer linear association with dispersion, but still far
from strong: an increase of 20 minutes in the dispersion measure translates, on average, to an increase
of about 1 unit of cost per order, and an increase of 2.5 minutes in click-to-door mean and 1 minute in
ready-to-pickup mean.
From Figure 2 we have dug up the data to contextualize the abnormally high percentage of orders
undelivered (beyond 3%) registered for two instances. These instances have a low degree of dynamism
(in the 0.35-0.40 range) and relatively low dispersion (in lower third of the spectrum), as well as a
very small size (269 orders), but a very high ratio of orders to courier hours. Their solutions achieved
relatively high ready-to-pickup values, high utilization and a relatively low number of orders per bundle.
23
Table 9 compares their performance vis a vis the corresponding instance variations featuring optimized
schedules, and reveals that the historical courier capacity was not distributed in an effective way over
time, and the system could not easily overcome larger than expected bursts of order arrivals. This
example serves as a warning: no matter the size of the problems, the algorithm can only do so much in
the presence of poorly distributed capacity, and, by the same measure, a good forecasting and courier
scheduling process can go a long way towards guaranteeing reliable performance.
instance orders
cour. h. % undel.
CtoD
mean
CtoD
90%
CtoD
overage
RtoP
mean
RtoP
90%
util.
mean
cost
order
orders
bundle
1o50t100s1p100 2.1 3.35 38.24 64 6.16 8.44 25 0.73 10.28 1.17
1o50t100s1p125 2.1 4.09 41.89 64.3 7.65 8.51 21 0.74 10.2 1.16
1o50t100s2p100 2.19 0 31.54 45.2 1.44 3.38 10 0.85 10.27 1.05
1o50t100s2p125 2.19 0 35.57 53 3.38 3.73 11 0.82 10.18 1.03
Table 9: Illustrating the potential consequences of inadequate courier schedules
Figures 25-28, available in appendix G, illustrate the second-degree interaction effects of key instance
features with each performance measure explored in Figure 2. Most of the observable interaction trends
in Figures 25 - 28 are expected, given the direction of the main effects. One result worth highlighting
is the following: in scenarios with low pickup flexibility, low reaction time, or high dispersion, having
higher dynamism enables a higher 10th percentile of courier utilization and a smaller percentage of
orders undelivered. We conjecture that as orders are more evenly distributed over time in these difficult
scenarios, the algorithm is able to find a few more assignments during non-peak times for otherwise
poorly occupied couriers.
4.5.4 Performance value of algorithm features
The average performance of the different algorithm variations is summarized by a point estimate and a
95% bootstraped confidence interval (based on 1000 bootstrap iterations) in Figure 3, for variations 0-
15, and Figure 4, for variations 16-21. Most variations, except 16 and 18, achieve an average percentage
of orders undelivered similar to the default algorithm (0.25%). This suggests that allowing bundles
and having a sensible commitment policy are the key to ensure that as many deliveries as possible are
completed.
Within variations 0-15, which focus on optimization frequency, order-assignment horizon and lookahead, the average number of orders per bundle is quite sensitive to the specific configuration of parameters. Other things equal, bundling intensity tends to be higher for larger assignment horizons. Although
not shown in Figure 3, the myopic lookahead configurations that lead to higher target bundle sizes (long
lookahead for orders and short lookahead for couriers), can have a small but significant marginal effect
on average performance (for details, see Figure 31 in Appendix H).
Compared to the default algorithm, variations 4-7, which have a longer assignment horizon, achieve
significantly worse service measures, and significantly higher utilization and bundling intensity: the
assignment horizon is too long, leading to larger bundles (and higher utilization) that unnecessarily hurt
the last deliveries in each route (worse click-to-door) and have a longer spread in ready times (worse
ready-to-pickup).
Variations 8-11, with more frequent optimization runs, are also significantly outperformed by the
default algorithm in all service metrics. In this case, however, there is not even a significant gain in
utilization, which suggests that these variations are just too myopic. This conclusion is confirmed by
24
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
% undeliv.
32.0
32.5
33.0
33.5
34.0
34.5
35.0
CtD
48
49
50
51
52
53
CtD 90%
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
3.75
CtD Over.
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
RtP
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
RtP 90%
0.550
0.575
0.600
0.625
0.650
0.675
0.700
0.725
util.
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
util. 10%
10.8
11.0
11.2
11.4
11.6
11.8
12.0
12.2
cost/order
f = 5, u = 10
(default)
f = 5, u = 10
(algo_var=1,2,3)
f = 5, u = 20 f = 2, u = 4 f = 2, u = 8
algo. descr.
1.06
1.08
1.10
1.12
1.14
1.16
1.18
orders/bundle
Figure 3: Performance of algorithm variations – Part 1
25
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
% undeliv.
31.5
32.0
32.5
33.0
33.5
34.0
34.5
CtD
47
48
49
50
51
52
CtD 90%
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
CtD Over.
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
RtP
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
RtP 90%
0.575
0.600
0.625
0.650
0.675
0.700
0.725
util.
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
util. 10%
10.50
10.75
11.00
11.25
11.50
11.75
12.00
12.25
cost/order
default single-stage
commitment
no priority
groups
no bundling medium
complexity
model
high
complexity
model
algo. descr.
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.10
1.12
orders/bundle
Figure 4: Performance of algorithm variations – Part 2
26
the fact that variations 12-15, which also have more frequent optimizations compared to the default,
but are less myopic, achieve performance measures similar to the default algorithm.
As noted earlier, variations 16 (single-stage commitment strategy) and 18 (no bundling) lead to
solutions with higher utilization values and less orders per bundle, due to less bundling opportunities.
But this goes hand in hand with a significantly higher rate of orders undelivered, thus removing any
cause for celebration in the apparent improvement in cost or the rest of service performance measures.
What is worse, variation 16, with a single-stage commitment policy, also tends to increase click-to-door
and ready-to-pickup measures.
Variation 17, where one matching, instead of three, is solved per optimization run, sacrifices a bit
on the percentage of orders undelivered (0.27%) and cost per order (11.42), in order to outperform
the default algorithm by a small margin in click-to-door mean (32.58) and overage (2.73), as well as
ready-to-pickup mean (1.79).
Variation 19, featuring the assignment model of medium complexity, is able to outperform the default
algorithm, however slightly, on click-to-door metrics (32.72 mean, 2.76 overage), ready-to-pickup (1.92
mean), keeping cost per order in check (11.42) and paying only a small penalty in the percentage of
orders undelivered (0.26%). This is achieved with orders per bundle and utilization values similar to
the default algorithm.
As expected, variation 20, featuring the assignment model of highest complexity, is able to achieve
even better performance, lower click-to-door (32.64 mean, 2.72 overage) lower ready-to-pickup (1.91
mean) and lower cost per order (11.40), without increasing the percentage of orders undelivered (0.26%).
This is achieved with slightly higher utilization (0.31 mean), and slightly fewer orders per bundle (1.08).
A paired differences analysis (where we focus on the differences in performance from a particular
variation and the default algorithm over all instances) can reveal more clearly the value of each algorithmic feature, and allow us to assess how different instance structural properties amplify or reduce
said value. Figures 29-35, available in Appendix H, summarize the distribution of paired performance
differences across the instance feature space.
Impact of optimization frequency. Table 10 summarizes the results of experiment runs in algorithm variations 0-16, paired by the configuration of horizon and lookahead multipliers, to compare two
settings: one where there are 2 minutes between consecutive optimizations, and one where this interval
is 5 minutes (default). The results show that, by and large, 5-minute optimization intervals lead to
a lower percentage of orders undelivered, lower click-to-door mean, lower ready-to-pickup mean, lower
courier utilization mean, and more orders per bundle than the alternative.
Optimization interval paired differences
5 minutes 2 minutes (f = 2) - (f = 5)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.23 0.48 0.28 0.51 0.05 0.18
CtoD mean 33.01 3.39 33.27 3.51 0.26 0.93
RtoP mean 2 1.49 2.5 1.79 0.50 0.78
cost per order 11.42 1.3 11.4 1.21 -0.01 0.18
orders per bundle 1.12 0.07 1.09 0.05 -0.03 0.03
Table 10: Differences in performance of algorithm with more frequent optimizations (2 min) vs default
(5 min)
Figures 5 and 29 (in Appendix H) show the interaction of these paired differences with key structural
properties. Interestingly, there is a clear trend across the urgency spectrum: as the average reaction
time increases, the advantage of 5-minute optimization intervals evaporates. For instances in the upper
27
'


"$ 




	

	

	
		

	






  ""
'

!" 
"&" #%
$!
Figure 5: Performance difference of algorithm with more frequent optimizations (2 minutes, as opposed
to default 5 minutes) vs instance characteristics
half of the range of reaction times, i.e., for less urgent scenarios, a 2-minute optimization interval even
achieves lower costs per order and lower click-to-door overage. In our view, as urgency decreases, service
time windows for orders become longer, and the space of feasible bundles at any point in time grows
larger, which may erode the effectiveness of the bundle insertion heuristics. Shrinking the optimization
period (and the assignment horizon in the same proportion) reduces the space of feasible bundles, thus
preserving the effectiveness of the heuristics in less urgent environments.
Furthermore, as the ratio of orders to courier hours increases, the default algorithm tends to have
more orders per bundle than the 2-minute interval alternative, reflecting the greater ability to consolidate
orders of an algorithm with less frequent assignments, which allows the default algorithm to maintain
an advantage, albeit diminishing, in terms of click-to-door and ready-to-pickup. However, the trend is
steady enough that, in the upper third of the range of this ratio, 2-minute optimization intervals lead
to lower percentage of orders undelivered and lower cost per order.
Impact of horizon for assignments. Table 11, as well as Figures 6 and 30 (in Appendix H),
summarize the performance difference between variation 4, which considers orders for assignment if they
are ready within 20 minutes, and the default algorithm, where the assignment horizon is 10 minutes.
Assignment horizon paired differences
10 minutes 20 minutes (u = 20) - (u = 10)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.25 0.46 0.22 0.51 -0.02 0.17
CtoD mean 32.74 3.34 33.15 3.37 0.42 0.55
RtoP mean 1.93 1.52 2.05 1.45 0.12 0.41
cost per order 11.42 1.26 11.41 1.34 -0.01 0.19
orders per bundle 1.09 0.05 1.13 0.06 0.04 0.02
Table 11: Differences in performance of algorithm with longer assignment horizon (20 min) vs default
(10 min)
28
)	

	
&!'
	
	
		


	

	
		
	










	

	


"##$"&##

	


%
"#("!"#$$! !%
"#("!

 !'$	

 !
Figure 6: Performance difference of algorithm with a 20 minute horizon for assignment of orders (as
opposed to default 10 minute horizon) vs instance characteristics
A longer assignment horizon leads to more orders per bundle and higher courier utilization levels.
Meanwhile the default assignment horizon is preferable in terms of click-to-door and ready-to-pickup,
though this advantage comes at the price of a slightly higher percentage of orders undelivered. The
difference in service performance tends to become smaller for instances with low urgency, less orders
placed, and low order to courier hours ratio, but its sign persists across almost all levels of all instance
characteristics, with two clear exceptions: (i) the instances with low dynamism and very poor quality
schedules summarized in Table 9, where the default algorithm gives up some quality of service in order
to get a higher percentage of orders delivered; and (ii) a group of instances with high dispersion and
high urgency, summarized in Table 12, where the default algorithm struggles to create enough bundles,
sacrificing ready-to-pickup (and some order deliveries altogether) to preserve the rest of performance
metrics, while variation 4 achieves the same feat with better ready-to-pickup (and more orders delivered)
by virtue of its reduced myopism.
instance resp.
time
orders disp. algo. %
undel.
CtoD
mean
RtoP
mean
util.
mean
cost
order
orders
bundle
5o50t100s1p100 81.6 1362 25.8 0 0.5 38.3 5.8 0.8 10.4 1.2
5o50t100s1p125 81.1 1362 25.8 0 1.3 42.7 6.4 0.9 10.3 1.2
7o50t100s1p125 81.2 1606 27 0 0.6 38 4.6 0.8 10.4 1.1
5o100t100s1p100 81.6 2724 26.7 0 0.6 37.1 4.2 0.8 10.8 1.2
5o50t100s1p100 81.6 1362 25.8 4 0.3 38 5.3 0.9 10.2 1.2
5o50t100s1p125 81.1 1362 25.8 4 1.0 42.2 5.7 0.9 10 1.2
7o50t100s1p125 81.2 1606 27 4 0.3 36.7 3.1 0.9 10.2 1.1
5o100t100s1p100 81.6 2724 26.7 4 0.3 37.1 3.7 0.8 10.5 1.3
Table 12: Illustrating the potential consequences of excessive myopism in assignment horizon
In terms of cost per order, the default assignment horizon tends to yield better results in instances
with low urgency, while the opposite is true for instances with high urgency. As a tentative explanation,
consider that for a given assignment horizon, higher urgency implies that each order has the chance to
29
be matched to a courier less times before a final commitment is required: a longer assignment horizon
compensates by beginning the assignment process for each order earlier in time.
The default assignment also achieves lower cost than variation 4 for low order to courier hour ratio,
but the tables are turned for higher order to courier hour ratio: when there are many orders per courier
and bundling becomes critical, a longer assignment horizon allows higher consolidation levels, thus
driving cost down.
Impact of commitment policy. Table 13, Figure 7 and Figure 32 (in Appendix H) summarize the
performance difference between algorithm variation 16, which uses a single-stage lazy commitment, and
the default algorithm, which uses two-stage additive commitment.


	


$

	

%$


	


	








	

	
	


	



# $!%!(
*
*

 ""#%
 $$! )
##$ $&#$' #$$& $
Figure 7: Performance difference of algorithm with single-stage commitment rule (as opposed to default
two-stage additive rule) vs instance characteristics.
Commitment strategy paired differences
Two-stage Single-stage (single - two-stage)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.25 0.46 0.5 1.29 0.25 1.01
CtoD mean 32.74 3.34 32.95 4.06 0.21 1.11
RtoP mean 1.93 1.52 2.48 2.69 0.55 1.26
cost per order 11.42 1.26 11.36 1.28 -0.06 0.13
orders per bundle 1.09 0.05 1.04 0.02 -0.05 0.03
Table 13: Differences in performance of algorithm with single-stage commitment policy vs. default
(two-stage additive commitment)
The evidence shows that, compared to the default, a single-stage commitment policy encourages less
orders per bundle across the board. Couriers are on the road a longer proportion of time (increased
30
utilization levels), as the algorithm struggles to find solutions that deliver all orders (percentage of orders
undelivered doubles) with the same service quality. Meanwhile, mean ready-to-pickup times degrade
by 28%, but click-to-door times increase at a much slower pace (about 1% in mean and about 5% in
overage). We advance a tentative interpretation: if conditions of the system have changed, the two-stage
commitment policy has the advantage of allowing bundles to grow in size, or to change their delivery
sequence while couriers are en-route or even waiting at the restaurant (thus protecting click-to-door
measures, but not ready to pickup measures).
All in all, the results reaffirm the conclusions reached in our reading of Figure 4: if the goal is to
deliver all orders and deliver them quickly, using of a single-stage commitment policy is not a good
idea in any scenario. In fact, the flaws of single-stage commitment are more evident (through a larger
increase in the percentage of orders undelivered and all click-to-door and ready-to-pickup measures) on
instances with low dynamism, low pickup flexibility, or high ratio of orders to courier hours, that is, as
the dynamics of the problem become more challenging.
Impact of priority scheme. Table 14, Figure 8 and Figure 33 (in Appendix H) summarize the
performance difference between algorithm variation 17, which uses a single matching per optimization
run, and the default algorithm, which solves a sequence of 3 matchings based on a priority rule for orders
and bundles.
+
+

&
	


	










	
	
	

	
	
"$$%"'$$
+

+

&
#$"$&*&"!"'!%! &!
!"#$"$&)$"'#%(%	#$"$&)$"'#%
Figure 8: Performance difference of algorithm with a single matching problem per optimization run (as
opposed to default sequence of 3 matchings based on priority) vs instance characteristics
For the most part, running the algorithm with or without priority groups does not make much of
a difference in terms of orders undelivered, click-to-door measures, or even cost, except for a subset of
poorly staffed instances, (as described in Table 9), where doing away with the priority scheme leads to
a significant sacrifice in the percentage of orders undelivered, accompanied by improvements in clickto-door, ready-to-pickup and cost per order: in these instances, during moments when the system is
under pressure to keep up with all deliveries, the default algorithm prioritizes delivery of orders that are
already in trouble (thereby reducing the number of undelivered orders) and places the burden in orders
with lower priority (worsening their click-to-door performance), while variation 17 prioritizes orders that
are still on time, to achieve gains in click-to-door times, at the expense of orders that are already late
(which sometimes may imply giving up on them altogether). This behavior suggests that on instances
31
Priority scheme paired differences
Yes No (No - Yes)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.25 0.46 0.27 0.61 0.03 0.26
CtoD mean 32.74 3.34 32.58 3.16 -0.16 0.42
RtoP mean 1.93 1.52 1.79 1.28 -0.14 0.35
cost per order 11.42 1.26 11.42 1.26 0.00 0.08
orders per bundle 1.09 0.05 1.09 0.05 0.00 0.01
Table 14: Differences in performance of algorithm with no priority scheme to find assignments vs.
default, (three priority groups)
with a highly limited supply of couriers, demand management strategies to select which orders to “give
up” on can have a big impact.
Impact of bundling. Table 15, Figure 9, and Figure 34 (in Appendix H) summarize the performance
difference of variation 18, where the algorithm is forbidden from bundling orders together (i.e. a hard
limit of 1 is imposed on the size of bundles), and the default algorithm.

	


(" )
+




	
'
	
	
		


	

	
		
	










	

	


#%%&#(%%

	


'
(" "$# *
"#(" ")&*"!'%'(" "
Figure 9: Performance difference of algorithm that completely forbids bundling (as opposed to default
with dynamic bundling intensity) vs instance characteristics
The results show that allowing bundles is critical for the system: their prohibition almost triples
the number of orders undelivered, while deteriorating the ready-to-pickup mean by about 30%, all for
minuscule gains of less than 1% in click-to-door and a 1% improvement in cost per order.
Results show that only in the most dynamic, most flexible, less congested and most disperse scenarios
can the absence of bundles lead to small improvements in click-to-door without sacrifices in the number
of orders delivered. Coincidentally, in these extreme scenarios, the number of orders per bundle used by
the default algorithm is smaller, i.e., bundling opportunities are scarce or of little help anyway.
32
Bundling paired differences
Yes No (No - Yes)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.25 0.46 0.69 1.77 0.44 1.52
CtoD mean 32.74 3.34 32.72 3.93 -0.02 1.16
RtoP mean 1.93 1.52 2.51 2.53 0.58 1.35
cost per order 11.42 1.26 11.26 1.29 -0.15 0.18
orders per bundle 1.09 0.05 1 0 -0.09 0.05
Table 15: Differences in performance of algorithm with no bundling allowed vs. default (allow bundling)
Impact of complexity of the assignment model. Table 16, Figure 10, and Figure 35 (in Appendix
H) summarize the performance difference of experiment runs that depart from the simple matching
model, and use larger and more complex assignment procedures.
Assignment model complexity paired differences
Low Medium High (Medium - Low) (High - Low)
mean std mean std mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.25 0.46 0.26 0.57 0.25 0.54 0.01 0.22 0.01 0.20
CtoD mean 32.74 3.34 32.72 3.32 32.64 3.34 -0.02 0.19 -0.09 0.22
RtoP mean 1.93 1.52 1.92 1.52 1.91 1.52 -0.01 0.17 -0.02 0.17
cost per order 11.42 1.26 11.42 1.25 11.4 1.25 0.00 0.07 -0.02 0.08
orders per bundle 1.09 0.05 1.09 0.05 1.08 0.05 0.00 0.01 -0.01 0.01
Table 16: Differences in performance of algorithm with with medium and high complexity assignment
models (as opposed to default linear programming model)
Overall, results show that the higher complexity assignment model dominates the medium complexity
model in all performance metrics. And, compared to the default, more complex models trade off a slight
increase in orders undelivered for slight improvements in the rest of service performance metrics. We
note that the small magnitude of these differences is rather surprising: this suggests that the default
approach, while perfectible, goes a really long way in guaranteeing satisfactory performance measures.
At greater detail, it can be noted that both medium and high complexity variations perform similarly
in terms of orders delivered, matching the levels of the default algorithm, except in poorly staffed instances, where Procedure 3 seems to be counterproductive (note that both medium and high complexity
versions use this Procedure), as significantly more orders are left undelivered compared to the default
setting. Inspection of the simulation logs reveals that this is caused by a poor decision logic at the end
of the operating period: a courier that is about to finish her shift is assigned a follow-up pair, but only
commits to the first route; then her shift finishes and the second element of the pair has no courier in
a good position to pick up the assignment. This unintended behavior – which may be handled as an
exception at the commitment stage in a production-level application – gives the reader a flavor of the
challenges faced during the implementation of fully-automated algorithmic dispatching technologies.
Moreover, the dominance of the high complexity assignment model over the medium and low complexity models is almost uniform across the space of instance characteristics, except in the case of the
very poorly staffed instances. Interestingly, the high complexity model solutions are consistently less
bundling-intensive than the ones produced by the default algorithm, while achieving noticeable, though
small, improvements in service and cost metrics in every instance, except the same subset of poorly
staffed instances.
33
0.0
0.5
1.0
% undeliv.
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1
CtD
0.1
0.0
0.1
RtP
(0.295, 0.335]
(0.335, 0.374]
(0.374, 0.413]
(0.413, 0.452]
(0.452, 0.492]
(0.492, 0.531]
(0.531, 0.57]
(0.57, 0.609]
dynamism
0.02
0.01
0.00
orders/bundle
assignment models
medium complexity
assignment - consider
follow-on tasks (on set
of simple bundles)
high complexity
assignment - generate all
ordered subsets by ready
time (and then consider
follow-ons)
Figure 10: Performance difference of algorithm with increasingly complex assignment models (as opposed
a matching linear program) vs instance characteristics
4.5.5 Performance of algorithm with imperfect information
Up to this point, we have assumed perfect information. Reality is different. Therefore, to assess the
value of information, we perform one experiment (many more are possible, of course) with a slightly
different information scheme: we assume that all information is perfectly known in advance, except for
the meal preparation time at a restaurant for which only the (true) mean is known. Consequently, until
an order is actually known to be ready (i.e., the simulation reaches the realized ready time of the order),
the algorithm uses the restaurant mean meal preparation time to estimate the order ready time. The
standard deviation of the difference between estimated and actual meal preparation times is about 8.19
minutes (average across all 240 instances), while the mean difference is about 0.25 minutes.
Table 17 summarizes the performance effects of this form of uncertainty. Unsurprisingly, service
quality degrades compared to the perfect-information baseline: in relative terms, orders undelivered
more than double, click-to-door mean increases by almost 4%, and ready-to-pickup mean increases by
about 50%. These results suggest that, under these conditions, the algorithm is unable to provide service
to some orders (presumably due to couriers signing-off before orders are actually ready), but preserves
a rather high quality of service for the remaining ones: after all, given that the imperfect estimates
have a standard deviation of more than 8 minutes, 1.29 minutes in click-to-door and 0.97 minutes in
ready-to-pickup may appear to be a worthwhile trade off.
5 Final remarks
In this paper, we have introduced the Meal Delivery Routing Problem, a dynamic deterministic model
of the structure and functioning of meal delivery systems, and we have developed a rolling-horizon
repeated-matching algorithm to solve this problem in (near) real-time. We have shown through compu34
Information assumption paired differences
Perfect Estimate (Estimate - Perfect)
mean std mean std mean std
% undelivered 0.25 0.46 0.62 2.03 0.37 1.97
CtoD mean 32.74 3.34 34.03 4.85 1.29 3.04
CtoD 90% 49.3 5.6 50.63 7.29 1.34 3.54
CtoD overage 2.77 1.53 3.40 2.27 0.63 1.12
RtoP mean 1.93 1.52 2.90 3.53 0.97 2.88
RtoP 90% 6.04 4.24 9.94 6.14 3.90 3.46
utilization mean 0.63 0.12 0.63 0.12 0.00 0.02
utilization 10% 0.31 0.15 0.33 0.15 0.02 0.06
cost per order 11.42 1.26 11.32 1.21 -0.10 0.14
orders per bundle 1.09 0.05 1.11 0.07 0.02 0.03
Table 17: Impact of imperfect preparation time estimates (only departure from perfect information).
tational results that our methodology can be leveraged to build solutions of high quality with respect
to multiple performance objectives in meal delivery systems of realistic size and difficulty levels. When
confronted with scenarios of high urgency, low flexibility, and scarce capacity, the rolling-horizon assignment algorithm makes minimal sacrifices in the fulfillment of deliveries, while sacrificing click-to-door
and ready-to-pickup measures in a steady fashion (linear performance degradation in all dimensions
of the instance characteristic space). The issue of courier scheduling deserves a special emphasis: in
practical applications, ensuring that an appropriate quantity of couriers is available at all times is often
equally or more crucial than tuning specific algorithm parameters.
Furthermore, we have shown that the key algorithmic ideas embedded in our method all play an
important role: optimization frequency, assignment horizon and commitment policy work together to
maintain a reasonable pool of individual orders from which good bundles (and routes) can be made,
if needed, without compromising service quality. Meanwhile, the intensity of bundle generation can
be modulated effectively using the dynamic target bundle sizes, thus allowing the system to adapt
automatically to temporal fluctuations in demand and supply. Moreover, the proposed priority scheme
is critical to keep up with the pace of arriving orders in the most overwhelming scenarios.
As discussed in Section 1, meal delivery and ride-hailing systems share similarities in scale, urgency
and dynamism; and our results confirm that a matching approach, which has already shown its merits
in ride-hailing, is also effective in meal delivery. Our results show that a linear matching model can
be expressive and powerful enough to achieve high quality solutions fast. Moreover, careful design of
slightly more complex assignment models can correct some of the pitfalls stemming from an excessively
myopic solution approach, enabling small but significant marginal improvements in overall performance,
while keeping run-times in check.
The ideas and results reported in this paper give rise to a variety of questions for further research.
In the realm of deterministic models, the development of exact algorithms for the perfect-information
version of the MDRP are clearly a worthwhile endeavor. In a more practical note, restaurant-dependent
dynamic target bundle sizes are a natural extension of our approach that would allow the system to
compensate for geographic imbalances in supply and demand. Additionaly, a systematic study of the
value of relocation decisions that are completely decoupled from the order commitment logic is an
important question.
In the stochastic realm, opportunities are abundant. While we recognize the importance of predicting
order ready times (as a function of arrival patterns and preparation times), we believe that the questions
that deserve greater attention, because of their novelty, are those related to courier autonomy. For
35
instance, independent-contractors usually work for more than one company (sometimes simultaneously),
and they leverage their autonomy to reject orders in a strategic way. Developing models to understand
assignment rejection behavior, and its relation to system performance, is a fundamental step in the road
towards a stochastic dynamic solution algorithm.
Another interesting phenomenon related to courier autonomy is “courier drainage”: couriers make
waiting and relocation decisions based on incomplete local information about the system in which
they operate. Over time, individual autonomous decisions may lead to too many couriers on areas
that are perceived as “profitable” and too few of them in areas that are not perceived as such. The
system-wide consequences emerging from courier drainage may not be in the best interest of the central
provider, restaurants, and even couriers themselves. Understanding the dynamics of courier drainage,
and developing strategies to mitigate it, is an exciting (and daunting) research direction.
References
[1] Niels Agatz, Alan Erera, Martin Savelsbergh, and Xing Wang. Optimization for dynamic ridesharing: A review. European Journal of Operational Research, 223(2):295 – 303, 2012. ISSN
0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2012.05.028. URL http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0377221712003864.
[2] C. Archetti, D. Feillet, and M.G. Speranza. Complexity of routing problems with release dates.
European Journal of Operational Research, 247(3):797–803, 2015.
[3] Claudia Archetti, Martin Savelsbergh, and M. Grazia Speranza. The vehicle routing problem with
occasional drivers. European Journal of Operational Research, 254(2):472 – 480, 2016. ISSN 0377-
2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2016.03.049. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0377221716301953.
[4] N. Azi, M. Gendreau, and J.-Y. Potvin. A dynamic vehicle routing problem with multiple delivery
routes. Annals of Operations Research, 199(1):103–112, 2012.
[5] Evan Bakker. The on-demand meal delivery report: Sizing the market, outlining the business models,
and determining the future market leaders. http://read.bi/2bU7EuD, 2016. Accessed: 2016-12-01.
[6] G. Berbeglia, J.F. Cordeau, and G. Laporte. Dynamic pickup and delivery problems. European
Journal of Operational Research, 202(1):8–15, 2010.
[7] Iman Dayarian and Martin Savelsbergh. Crowdshipping and same-day delivery: Employing in-store
customers to deliver online orders. Optimization Online, 2017.
[8] Caitlin Dewey. The insane $43 billion system that gets food delivered
to your door. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2017/08/08/
the-insane-43-billion-system-that-gets-food-delivered-to-your-door/, August 2017.
Accessed: 2017-10-03.
[9] Masabumi Furuhata, Maged Dessouky, Fernando Ordez, Marc-Etienne Brunet, Xiaoqing Wang,
and Sven Koenig. Ridesharing: The state-of-the-art and future directions. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 57(Supplement C):28 – 46, 2013. ISSN 0191-2615. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2013.08.012. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0191261513001483.
[10] Carsten Hirschberg, Alexander Rajko, Thomas Schumacher, and Martin Wrulich. The changing
market for food delivery. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/high-tech/our-insights/
the-changing-market-for-food-delivery, November 2016. Accessed: 2017-05-01.
36
[11] M. A. Klapp, A. L. Erera, and A. Toriello. The one-dimensional dynamic dispatch waves problem.
Transportation Science, 2016. doi: 10.1287/trsc.2016.0682.
[12] Mathias A. Klapp. Dynamic optimization for same-day delivery operations. PhD thesis, Georgia
Institute of Technology, 2016.
[13] A. Larsen, O. Madsen, and M. Solomon. Partially dynamic vehicle routing—models and algorithms.
Journal of the Operational Research Society, 53(6):637–646, Jun 2002. ISSN 1476-9360. doi: 10.
1057/palgrave.jors.2601352. URL https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jors.2601352.
[14] Karsten Lund, Oli B.G. Madsen, and Jens M. Rygaard. Vehicle routing problems with varying
degrees of dynamism. Technical Report IMM-REP-1996-1, Department of Mathematical Modeling,
The Technical University of Denmark, May 1996.
[15] Snezana Mitrovic-Minic and Gilbert Laporte. Waiting strategies for the dynamic pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Research Part B, 38(7):635–655, 2004. ISSN
0191-2615.
[16] Snezana Mitrovic-Minic, Ramesh Krishnamurti, and Gilbert Laporte. Double-horizon based heuristics for the dynamic pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Transportation Research Part
B: Methodological, 38(8):669 – 685, 2004. ISSN 0191-2615. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2003.
09.001. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S019126150300095X.
[17] Morgan Stanley Research. Is online food delivery about to get ’amazoned’? https://
www.morganstanley.com/ideas/online-food-delivery-market-expands/, sep 2017. Accessed:
2017-10-04.
[18] V. Pillac, M. Gendreau, C. Gu´eret, and A.L. Medaglia. A review of dynamic vehicle routing
problems. European Journal of Operational Research, 225(1):1–11, 2013.
[19] David Pisinger and Stefan Ropke. A general heuristic for vehicle routing problems. Computers &
operations research, 34(8):2403–2435, 2007.
[20] H.N. Psaraftis, M. Wen, and C.A. Kontovas. Dynamic vehicle routing problems: Three decades
and counting. Networks, 67(1):3–31, 2016.
[21] Reuters. How Amazon is making package delivery even cheaper. http://fortune.com/2016/02/
18/amazon-flex-deliveries/, 2016.
[22] Dami´an Reyes, Alan L. Erera, and Martin W.P. Savelsbergh. Complexity of routing problems with
release dates and deadlines. European Journal of Operational Research, 2017. ISSN 0377-2217.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2017.09.020. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S037722171730841X.
[23] Afonso Sampaio, Martin Savelsbergh, Lucas Veelenturf, and Tom Van Woensel. Crowd-based city
logistics. Optimization Online 2017-6346, 2017.
[24] Mitja Stiglic, Niels Agatz, Martin Savelsbergh, and Mirko Gradisar. Making dynamic ride-sharing
work: The impact of driver and rider flexibility. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review, 91(Supplement C):190 – 207, 2016. ISSN 1366-5545. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2016.04.010. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1366554515303033.
37
[25] MW Ulmer, BW Thomas, and DC Mattfeld. Preemptive depot returns for a dynamic same-day
delivery problem. Working paper. TU Braunschweig, Germany, 2016.
[26] Rinde RS van Lon, Eliseo Ferrante, Ali E Turgut, Tom Wenseleers, Greet Vanden Berghe, and
Tom Holvoet. Measures of dynamism and urgency in logistics. European Journal of Operational
Research, 253(3):614–624, 2016.
[27] Stacy A. Voccia, Ann Melissa Campbell, and Barrett W. Thomas. The same-day delivery problem
for online purchases. Transportation Science, 0(0):null, 0. doi: 10.1287/trsc.2016.0732.
[28] Xing Wang, Niels Agatz, and Alan Erera. Stable matching for dynamic ride-sharing systems.
Transportation Science, 0(0):null, 0. doi: 10.1287/trsc.2017.0768.
[29] Jian Yang, Patrick Jaillet, and Hani Mahmassani. Real-time multivehicle truckload pickup and
delivery problems. Transportation Science, 38(2):135–148, 2004. doi: 10.1287/trsc.1030.0068. URL
http://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/trsc.1030.0068.
[30] Baris Yildiz and Martin Savelsbergh. Provably high-quality solutions for the meal delivery routing
problem. Georgia Institute of Technology, 2017.
38
Appendix A: Instance generation - reduction of order and courier
sets
Reduction of order set through randomized selection of restaurants
Algorithm 4: Indirect p-Reduction of order set through randomized selection of restaurants
Data: p, the percentage of reduction.
O, original set of orders.
R, original set of restaurants.
Result: O0
, reduced set of orders.
R0
, reduced set of restaurants.
O0 ← ∅;
R0 ← ∅;
n
0 ← p ∗ |O|;
repeat
r ← restaurant selected from R (uniform random sampling without replacement);
Or ← orders placed from O at r;
O0 ← O0 ∪ Or ;
R0 ← R0 ∪ {r};
until |O0
| > n
0
;
if |O0
| > n0
then
x ← |O0
| − n
0
; /* excess from target */
y ← n
0 − |O0 \ Or| ; /* deficit from target if last restaurant not in sample */
if y 6 x then
O0 ← O0 \ Or ; /* backpedal... */
R0 ← R0 \ {r};
return O0
,R0
;
39
Reduction of courier set
Algorithm 5: p-Reduction of courier set
Data: p, the percentage of reduction.
S, the set of shift start times in current schedule.
Bs∀s ∈ S, the set of shifts in the original schedule that share start time s ∈ S.
Result: Cs∀s ∈ S, the set of shifts in the reduced schedule that share start time s ∈ S.
for s ∈ S do
/* Set target number of hours */
c
0
s ← p ∗ c(Bs); // c(Bs) is total number of courier hours in Bs
/* Build Cs by sampling one shift at a time */
Cs ← ∅;
repeat
b ← shift selected from Bs (uniform random sampling without replacement);
Cs ← Cs ∪ {b} ;
until c(Cs) > c
0
s
;
if c(Cs) > c0
s
then
b ← shift of maximal duration in Cs;
b
0 ← shift starting at time and location of b, with duration c(b) − (c(Cs) − c
0
s
);
Cs ← {b
0} ∪ Cs \ {b};
end
end
return C =
S
s∈S
Cs ;
40
Appendix B: Instance generation - optimizing courier schedules
The shift cover problem.
Before we introduce our offline shift-optimization process, we begin by describing the optimization
problem that lies at its core.
Let the planning horizon be [0, T]. An activity profile is a right-continuous function a : [0, T] → Z≥0
indicating at each point in time t an activity level a(t) that needs to be covered by resources (e.g., at
each point in time it indicates the number of active drivers required). Furthermore, let there be a finite
number of points 0 < t1 < t2 < . . . < tn < T at which the activity level changes, either up or down. We
assume that a(t) = 0 for 0 ≤ t < t1 and for tn ≤ t ≤ T.
Resources can be allocated to perform activities in the form of shifts. A resource profile is a function
r : [0, T] → Z≥0 indicating at each point in time the number of active resources, where the number of
active resources is determined by the number of active resource shifts. A resource profile is feasible if
a(t) ≤ r(t) for t ∈ [0, T]. Each resource shift has to satisfy the following requirements:
1. The length of any shift must be a number from L = {l1, . . . , lp}, where l1 6 . . . 6 lp.
2. A shift can start only at pre-specified shift start times 0 < s1 < . . . < sm < T, with s1 ≤ t1 and
sm + l1 ≥ tn.
The shift cover problem is to minimize the total shift length required to cover the activity profile,
i.e., to minimize the area under a feasible resource profile, given the start times and the shift lengths
allowed.
If we denote the number of shifts of length lk that start at time sj by x
sj
k
, then the following integer
program solves the shift cover problem.
minXm
j=1
X
p
k=1
lkx
sj
k
s.t.X
p
k=1
X
ti−lk6sj<ti
x
sj
k > a(ti−1) ∀i = 1, . . . , n
A concrete implementation
To decide the courier schedule to implement on a given instance, we have computed an “activity profile”
based on the solution to a perfect-information pick-up and delivery problem with time windows, obtained via the Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) heuristic [19]. The activity profile counts
the number of non-idle drivers in the perfect-information solution at regular intervals throughout the
operating period(e.g., every optimization time). Then, we can follow Algorithm 6.
41
Algorithm 6: Shift optimization procedure based on perfect-information heuristic solution
Data: P, activity profile computed from ALNS solution to perfect-information PDPTW.
B, the maximum total courier hours used historically.
Result: Optimized shift schedule for the dynamic problem
a ← 1 ; // value by which to re-scale the ALNS activity profile
repeat
P
0 ← scale up P by a ; // multiply value counts of every period in P by a
Solve shift cover problem on P
0
;
if shift-length of P
0
exceeds B then STOP repetition loop;
a ← a + 0.1;
P ← P
0
;
until B < total courier hours in schedule induced by P;
Locate courier start locations randomly around the busiest restaurants in the next hour from
the starting time of each shift;
return shift schedule induced by (re-scaled) P, with total courier hours no larger than B;
Appendix C: Description of instance files
Information for an instance is provided in four text files, with lines formatted as follows (in all files the
first line contains helpful information on its content and can be ignored):
Listing 1: Restaurant set
Re s tau ran t ID , x , y
Listing 2: Order set
Order ID , x , y , placement time , Re s tau ran t ID , ready time
Listing 3: Courier set
Co u ri e r ID , x , y , on−time , off −time
Listing 4: Time and compensation parameters
T ravel time m u l t i p l i e r , s e r v i c e time a t pickup ,
s e r v i c e time a t drop−off , t a r g e t c l i c k −to−door time ,
maximum c l i c k −to−door time , per−o r d e r pay , per−hour pay
42
Appendix D: Use of solution evaluator
A solution to an instance can be summarized by a list of assignments of orders to couriers. A full
specification also includes pickup and drop-off times for individual orders, as well as the sequence of
locations visited and the corresponding departure times for each courier.
Our solution evaluator receives as input three files. The first file contains one line for each pickup
and delivery assignment (which represent decisions and corresponding decision times). The format of
each line is as follows (in all files the first line is assumed top contain helpful information on its content
and will be ignored):
Listing 5: Assignment information
a s signmen t time , pickup time , Co u ri e r ID , Order ID , . . . , Order ID
Note that if prepositioning or assignmend updates are allowed in the operating environment, only
final assignments should be recorded in this file.
The second file contains one line per individual order delivered, formatted as follows:
Listing 6: Order delivery information
Order ID , placement time , ready time ,
pickup time , d e l i v e r y time , c o u r i e r ID
The third file contains one line per movement of a courier. Moves corresponding to each courier are
presented in blocs and, within each bloc, lines are written following the sequence in which the movements
are executed. In general, each line is formatted as follows:
Listing 7: Courier dispatch information
Co u ri e r ID , d e pa r t u r e time , o ri gi n , d e s t i n a t i o n
where origin is either 0, indicating the courier’s on-location, Restaurant ID, or Order ID, and
destination is either Restaurant ID or Order ID.
The evaluator checks that the following conditions are satisfied:
1. each order is assigned at most once;
2. assignments are not made before orders are placed;
3. a courier completes all the pickup tasks before the end of his duty period.
4. the pickup time of a bundle is at or after the latest ready time of the orders in the bundle;
5. orders are delivered in the sequence prescribed by the assignment;
6. the sequence of courier movements is feasible (no tele-transporting), and all arrival and departure
times are consistent.
7. at the time of the pickup of an order or a bundle, the courier is in the corresponding restaurant.
8. at the time of the drop off of an order, the courier is in the corresponding diner location.
If a given solution satisfies these conditions, i.e. it is feasible, the evaluator returns a file with values
for the aforementioned performance metrics. If the solution is infeasible, the evaluator returns a file
indicating the ID of couriers and orders involved in an infeasible action.
43
Appendix E: Parameter Tuning
Before starting the full-scale experiments, reasonable default values for a series of secondary parameters
in the algorithm must be found. These include:
1. tolerances for service loss (click-to-door overage) and freshness loss (delay in pickup beyond ready
time) before orders escalate in priority;
2. tolerance for freshness loss of individual orders before forcing the commitment of a bundle;
3. coefficient (reward) for utilization in the matching objective;
4. freshness loss coefficient (penalty) in the matching objective;
5. service loss coefficient (penalty) in the insertion cost function.
To tune these parameters, a preliminary experiment is conducted over a stratified sample of the set of
instances: for each of the 24 instance variations, 4 instances are selected at random. Then, a set of 32
random parameters configurations is created by repeating the following procedure:
1. The tolerances for service loss and freshness loss before orders escalate in priority are set simultaneously by uniform-randomly choosing a pair from
[(10, 5),(15, 5),(15, 10),(20, 5),(20, 10),(20, 15),(25, 5),(25, 10),(25, 15),(25, 20)]
The first entry in the pair represents the service loss tolerance, and the second one represents the
freshness loss tolerance.
2. The tolerance for freshness loss of individual orders before forcing the commitment of a bundle is
set by uniform-randomly choosing a value in [15, 20, 25].
3. The utilization coefficient in the matching objective is set by sampling the uniform distribution
on the interval [1, 10].
4. The freshness loss coefficient in the matching objective is set by sampling the uniform distribution
on the interval [0, 1].
5. The service loss coefficient in the insertion cost function is set by sampling the uniform distribution
on the interval [0, 1].
The resulting algorithm configurations are then tested on each instance. Default values are chosen
for each of the 24 instance variations, with two goals in mind: virtually zero orders left-over at the end
of the planning period, and minimal average click-to-door. Concretely, an algorithm run is considered
’successful’ in a particular instance if no more than 0.5% of orders are left unserved, and a parameter
configuration is considered ’successful’ in a given instance variation sub-sample if the algorithm succeeds
in at least 75% of the cases (i.e. in 3 out of 4 instances in the tuning sample). The selection rule is
then: among the ’successful’ parameter configurations choose one that minimizes average click-to-door.
44
Appendix F: Algorithm performance on instance variations
The figures below illustrate performance metrics for different instance subsets, as follows:
• courier schedules: historical [cour_sched_type=1] and optimized [cour_sched_type=2].
• travel times: original [tt_multip=100] and shorter by 25% [tt_multip=75].
• preparation times: original [prep_multip=100] and longer by 25% [prep_multip=125].
• size reductions: original [size_reduction=o100]; sampling 50% of couriers and 50% of order set
[size_reduction=o50]; and sampling 50% of couriers and enough restaurants to obtain 50% of
orders [size_reduction=r50].











 
	 
 

 	












 
	
 	


 



	
	
Figure 11: Percentage of orders undelivered, across different instance classes
45

	
	







!
 
!

 


	
	







!

 


!

 



Figure 12: Click-to-door mean, across different instance classes
46









 
! "$ !  ! "$ ! 
 	
! 









 
! "	$ ! 
 	
! 
! "	$ ! 
#! 



Figure 13: Click-to-door 90th percentile, across different instance classes
47


	





	
!
 "$ 
  "$ 
 

 


	





	
!
 "$ 

 

 
 "$ 
# 





Figure 14: Click-to-door overage mean, across different instance classes
48


	





	
 
 "
  "
 




	





	
 
 "

 


 "
!





Figure 15: Ready-to-pickup mean, across different instance classes
49




	
	






! 
 !# 
  !# 
 	
 




	
	






! 
 !	# 

 	
 
 !	# 
" 



Figure 16: Ready-to-pickup 90th percentile, across different instance classes
50





	




 "  "
 






	




 "
 

 "
!



Figure 17: Mean orders per bundle, across different instance classes
51
	








!
 "
  "
 


	








!
 "

 


 "
!





Figure 18: Courier utilization mean, across different instance classes
52


	








 "
 !#   !# 
 	
 


	








 "
 !	# 
 	
 
 !	# 
" 



Figure 19: Courier utilization 10th percentile, across different instance classes
53


	





	


!
 !
 




	





	


!

 


!
 





Figure 20: Mean orders delivered per courier hour, across different instance classes
54


	





	


 "
  "
 




	





	


 "

 


 "
!





Figure 21: Mean bundles per courier hour, across different instance classes
55

	








 !# 
  !# 
 

 

	








 !# 

 

 
 !# 
" 





Figure 22: Average order earnings per courier, across different instance classes
56








	
	







 

 

 

 











	
	







 


 





 








Figure 23: Standard deviation of order earnings per courier, across different instance classes
57
	











 



 

	












 










Figure 24: Average total cost per order placed, across different instance classes
58
Appendix G: Uncontrolled instance properties and algorithm
performance



"




	
!




	

	





"







	
!




	

	






	
	
	

	
	
	
 
	  	  	  	 	
 
Figure 25: Percentage of orders undelivered and click-to-door overage, and their interaction with key
instance features
59



 




	





	

	





 







	





	

	












 
  	 	 	 	
 	

Figure 26: Click-to-door mean and 90th percentile, and their interaction with key instance features
60

	



















	



























	
	





 


     	
 

Figure 27: courier utilization mean and 10th percentile, and their interaction with key instance features
61



	
"











!









	
"











!




















 	     	 

 

Figure 28: cost per courier hour and average number of orders per bundle, and their interaction with
key instance features
62
Appendix H: Value of key algorithmic features
63

	
*#!+


)
/	

	
)
/


)+'



)
/


)
/	
/

*)!
/

*)!
/	

$()$''
	










	
		
	





-#"("
/

$''(*#!




	

		

	
	

	










''))"


	


	








	

	
	


	



($)% *%!,
	
	









	


		
		
			
			
	
	
	
	

$''(
	


	
	

	

	
		
			

	
	


$''($*''








	
		
		

	
	
		
	
		
	


	



(%'($#
$%)".)$#'&*#-
	"#+("#
Figure 29: Performance difference of algorithm with more frequent optimizations (2 minutes, as opposed
to default 5 minutes) vs instance characteristics
64



,&$"-

	
+




+

	
+-)
1




+



+




,+"$

	
,+"$	
1




'*+'))






	
	






	

	



/&%"*%



'))*,&$
			
				

	

	

	
	


	









!))++"%
				


		

	

	
		
			

	
	
			

		
	

	
	

*'+("#,($.


	

	



	
	


	
	

	


	














	



	


	
'))*
	
	
		


	

	
		
	










	

	


'))*',)")!
		
		
	
	
		

	
		
		


		

	

	






	

	


"*()*"'&
!')"0'&')**" &%&+
!')"0'&

%"&-*	

%"&
Figure 30: Performance difference of algorithm with a 20 minute horizon for assignment of orders (as
opposed to default 10 minute horizon) vs instance characteristics
65



+%#!,



*

	
*
0





*,(
0




*
0	

	
*
0	

	
+*!#
0






+*!#	
0




&)*&((






	
	






	

	



/%$!)$



&(()+%#
			
				

	

	

	
	


	









 ((**!$
				


		

	

	
		
			

	
	
			

		
	

	
	

)&*'!"+'#.


	

	



	
	


	
	

	


	














	



	


	
&(()
	
	
		


	

	
		
	










	

	


&(()&+(!(
		
		
	
	
		

	
		
		


		

	

	






	

	


!)'()!&%
#&(!* $#&&" )
Δ  Δ  #&-)*
Δ  Δ   ! )*
Δ  Δ  $!+$
Figure 31: Performance difference of algorithms with various lookaheads for calculation of bundle target sizes (against default, which uses 10 minutes for orders and 10 minutes for couriers) vs instance
characteristics
66




+%#!,



*

	
*

	


*,(



*

	
*






+*!#

	
+*!#	
0



&)*&((






	
	






	

	



/%$!)$
0	
0


&(()+%#
			
				

	

	

	
	


	









 ((**!$
				


		

	

	
		
			

	
	
			

		
	

	
	

)&*'!"+'#.


	

	



	
	


	
	

	


	














	



	


	
&(()
	
	
		


	

	
		
	










	

	


&(()&+(!(
		
		
	
	
		

	
		
		


		

	

	






	

	


!)'()!&%
&$$!*$%*'&#!/
)!%#)*&$$!*,)*-&)*!*!,&$$!*
Figure 32: Performance difference of algorithm with single-stage commitment rule (as opposed to default
two-stage additive rule) vs instance characteristics
67


*$" +
/	
/

)
/
/	

)
/

)+'
/

)
/
/	

)
/	

*) "
/	

	
*) "
/


%()%''
	










	
		
	





-$# (#
/	

%''(*$"




	

		

	
	

	










'')) #


	


	








	

	
	


	



(%)& !*&",
	
	









	


		
		
			
			
	
	
	
	

%''(
	


	
	

	

	
		
			

	
	


%''(%*' '








	
		
		

	
	
		
	
		
	


	



 (&'( %$
&' %' ) .) %$%*$"( $#) $
$%&' %' )-'%*&(+(
&' %' )-'%*&(
Figure 33: Performance difference of algorithm with a single matching problem per optimization run
(as opposed to default sequence of 3 matchings based on priority) vs instance characteristics
68






+%#!,



*
/

/



*
/	

	
*,(




*



*



+*!#

	


+*!#	
/

/



&)*&((






	
	






	

	



.%$!)$
/

/	

&(()+%#
			
				

	

	

	
	


	









 ((**!$
				


		

	

	
		
			

	
	
			

		
	

	
	

)&*'!"+'#-


	

	



	
	


	
	

	


	














	



	


	
&(()
	
	
		


	

	
		
	










	

	


&(()&+(!(
		
		
	
	
		

	
		
		


		

	

	






	

	


!)'()!&%
+%#!%'&#!.
%&+%#!%,).%$!*(*+%#!%
Figure 34: Performance difference of algorithm that completely forbids bundling (as opposed to default
with dynamic bundling intensity) vs instance characteristics
69
0.0
0.5
1.0
% undeliv.
0.25
0.00
0.25
CtD
1
0
CtD 90%
0.2
0.0
CtD Over.
0.0
0.2
RtP
0
1
RtP 90%
0.00
0.01
util.
0.025
0.000
0.025
util. 10%
0.2
0.0
cost/order
(0.295, 0.335]
(0.335, 0.374]
(0.374, 0.413]
(0.413, 0.452]
(0.452, 0.492]
(0.492, 0.531]
(0.531, 0.57]
(0.57, 0.609]
dynamism
0.02
0.00
orders/bundle
(80.686, 81.171]
(81.171, 81.652]
(81.652, 82.134]
(82.134, 82.615]
(82.615, 83.096]
(83.096, 83.578]
(83.578, 84.059]
(84.059, 84.54]
hard react. time
(10.431, 11.554]
(11.554, 12.668]
(12.668, 13.781]
(13.781, 14.895]
(14.895, 16.009]
(16.009, 17.123]
(17.123, 18.236]
(18.236, 19.35]
soft pickup flex.
(239.029, 613.375]
(613.375, 984.75]
(984.75, 1356.125]
(1356.125, 1727.5]
(1727.5, 2098.875]
(2098.875, 2470.25]
(2470.25, 2841.625]
(2841.625, 3213.0]
orders
(1.209, 1.377]
(1.377, 1.542]
(1.542, 1.708]
(1.708, 1.874]
(1.874, 2.039]
(2.039, 2.205]
(2.205, 2.371]
(2.371, 2.536]
orders/courier_h
(13.679, 16.304]
(16.304, 18.908]
(18.908, 21.511]
(21.511, 24.115]
(24.115, 26.719]
(26.719, 29.322]
(29.322, 31.926]
(31.926, 34.53]
dispersion
assignment models
medium complexity assignment - consider follow-on tasks (on set of simple bundles)
high complexity assignment - generate all ordered subsets by ready time (and then consider follow-ons)
Figure 35: Performance difference of algorithm with increasingly complex assignment models (as opposed
a matching linear program) vs instance characteristics
70